 DURBAN, Jul 21 2008 (IPS) - Baphethile Mntambo has been farming organically for the past five years because she knows that avoiding chemicals will in the long-term benefit her yield. She decided not to plant genetically modified seeds because she has heard that they cannot be saved for the next season and will eventually deplete her soil. But she is not entirely sure how and why. 
 Many small-scale farmers are suspicious of genetically-modified seed, but may plant it anyway when it's offered for free. Credit: Kristin Palitza/IPS 
 "I have heard about GMO, but I don't understand what it is exactly," she says. "The only thing I know is that it will cost a lot of money to buy the seeds, the fertiliser and the pesticides." 
 Mntambo is one of 50 small-scale farmers in the Valley of a Thousand Hills in South Africa's KwaZulu-Natal province who have been taught how to farm organically by non-governmental organisation Valley Trust. The farmers learn to plant seasonal crops that will provide their families both with food security and an opportunity to generate income by selling their produce at local markets. 
 "We decided to promote organic farming to create sustainability for small-scale farmers. We believe it is the only way to give them food sovereignty and stability," explains Valley Trust food security facilitator Nhlanhla Vezi. 
 The Valley Trust used to cooperate with the Department of Agriculture, according to Vezi, but the collaboration ceased when the department started to put pressure on small-scale farmers to form cooperatives if they wanted its support. "The Department makes very attractive offers to provide farming equipment, water piping and seeds, but then uses this as a strategy to push GMO because of agreements they have signed with multinational GM seed patent holders," says Vezi. 
 Rural farmers are often lured into planting GM seeds by the Department of Agriculture by promises of substantial bank loans and the prospect of huge earnings, agrees Lesley Liddell, director of Biowatch, an NGO promoting alternatives to GMO farming by encouraging farmers to inter-crop, use natural fertilisers and non-chemical crops. "But in the end, most farmers end up in huge debt, because they can't save seeds and are obliged to buy the matching GM fertilisers and pesticides." 
 Yet, small-scale farmers are often so desperate for financial support that they consider planting GMO crops against better knowledge if they are offered the seeds for free. "I know that GMO is not good in the long run, but if someone gave me these seeds I would still plant them," says Tholani Bhengu, another small-scale farmer who works with the Valley Trust. "For me, the most important thing is to bring food on the table every week. I can't afford to think now about what will happen next year." 
 Because small-scale farmers in rural Africa often have little or no formal education, they are generally unable to make informed choices around GMO farming. "We encourage them to attend portfolio committees that discuss GMO regulations, but the farmers' knowledge is very limited, so it's difficult for them to contribute. They understand the issues but not the legislation," says Liddell. 
 South Africa is the only country within the Southern African Development Community (SADC) to grow GM crops – maize, cotton and soya – commercially. Since 1997, GMO farming is regulated by the Genetically Modified Organisms Act. 
 "The adoption of GM crops in SA has increased over the last ten years and this has also filtered down to small-scale farmers," confirms Priscilla Sehoole, chief communications officer of the national Department of Agriculture. 
 "As with any other technology, there are potential risks associated with GMO technology and these include those related to human and animal health and also the environment," she admits. "Therefore, the regulation of all activities involving GMOs is subjected to a scientific safety assessment process that evaluates the potential risks." 
 Seehole says the South African Department of Agriculture would like to harmonise GMO policies across SADC to "eliminate some of the technical barriers that (currently) hinder trade in the region." 
 But anti-GMO activists, such as the African Centre for Biosafety, are opposed to this approach. "The GM industry is pushing for harmonised legislation because it will make it easier to commercialise varieties of GM crops across countries. But those concerned with biosafety very much doubt if regional harmonisation (of biosafety legislation) would be of advantage," says African Centre of Biosafety director Mariam Mayet. 
 "At the moment, each SADC country has its own policies and all these laws are very different from each other. This means that each GMO application has to go through the approval system and public consultation of each country, which is good for transparency and accountability " she explains. 
 "When South Africa passed GMO legislation in 1997, most people weren't aware of how highly contentious the technology would become. But now there is no way back. Once you're in it, you're in it," says Mayet. 
 South Africa's food industry is already saturated with GM, she says: "Everything is contaminated, and to make matters worse, labelling of GM content is not mandatory. We need serious policy reform and to implement a testing system that traces which foods contain GMO and which do not." 
 Over the past decade, South Africa has entered trade agreements with large, multi-national agricultural biotechnology corporations, such as Monsanto, which – in an attempt to control the world’s agricultural production – promote the subsidisation of patented GM seeds. Through an incentive system supporting monocultures, small-scale farmers are systematically integrated into commercial agriculture, mainly for export, and encouraged to put together their land. 
 "It all looks very nice on paper, but it is actually a clever ploy to get access to people's land. Small-scale farmers who sign up for GM deals quickly lose control over seed management, production and eventually their land. This means they lose their food sovereignty," says Mayet. "GMO marginalises poor, small-scale farmers. We are in for hard times and need to fight for people's right to land and resources. But we won't give up." 
 This story includes downloadable print-quality images -- Copyright IPS, to be used exclusively with this story. 
 Would you consider a $20.00 contribution today that will help to keep the IPS news wire active? Your contribution will make a huge difference. 
Cultural indicators of Indigenous Peoples'
food and agro-ecological systems*

by
Ellen Woodley, Eve Crowley, Jennie Dey de Pryck
and Andrea Carmen

* Paper jointly commissioned by FAO and the International Indian Treaty Council (IITC), with support
from the Government of Norway and, indirectly, from the Christensen Fund.

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not
imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal or development status of any country,
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or
boundaries.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for
educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written
permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction
of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited
without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be
addressed to: Chief, Electronic Publishing Policy and Support Branch, Communication Division,
FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to: copyright@fao.org

2

Quotations highlighting the close relationship between culture and
Indigenous Peoples’ traditional food systems
Gathered from Indigenous Peoples during the 2nd Global Consultation on the Right to Food and
Food Security for Indigenous Peoples (Nicaragua, 7-9 September 2006).

“We would rather become extinct that lose our traditional food sources.”

“We are the land and the land is us.”
“To destroy the land is to destroy the people.”

“We are not the owners of land. We are the guardians.”

“The death of a traditional food system is the death of a nation…physically
and culturally. We can and must protect and restore practices that can
make us healthy and well as indigenous people.”

“If we are hungry, we do not just want to kill the hunger by eating three
plates of food or eating the wrong quality of food. Our way of living and
health are inextricably linked with our food and spirituality.”

“Trees are our brothers and sisters. We are of the same genealogical
branch. When you understand this, you can understand what deforestation
means for our well being.”

“Poverty is the lack of self-determination. Success is having the knowledge
and skills for survival. The wealthiest among us are those that give the most
and only take what they need. Life has its own spirits and humans, as part
of creation, must respect those spirits.”

3

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the many people who contributed to the preparation of this paper
which was carried out under the overall technical guidance of Eve Crowley (FAO) and policy
guidance of Andrea Carmen in her role as Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development
(SARD) Focal Point for the Indigenous Peoples’ Major Group of Civil Society.
The issues addressed in the paper first emerged at the Indigenous Peoples’ Consultation on the
Right to Food: A Global Consultation (17-19 April 2002, Sololá, Guatemala), which was
organized by the International Indian Treaty Council (IITC) with support from FAO. In 2003 and
2004 the IITC circulated a questionnaire among its members to determine Indigenous Peoples’
own perceptions of cultural indicators and the factors they should encompass. Based on this
questionnaire survey and subsequent discussions at the Fourth Session of the Permanent Forum
for Indigenous Issues (UNPFII 4) in 2005, eight indicator categories were developed by the IITC.
Ellen Woodley, with some assistance from Caroline Dookie, then undertook the literature review,
in order to provide substantive evidence for the appropriateness of these indicator categories. She
prepared the first draft of the paper, drawing on the literature review and the results of the IITC
survey. The executive summary of this first draft was discussed at the 2nd Global Consultation on
the Right to Food and Food Security for Indigenous Peoples (7-9 September 2006, Bilwi, Puerto
Cabezas, Nicaragua) where Indigenous Peoples’ and UN representatives identified gaps in the
indicator framework table presented in the paper, reached consensus on indicators that reflect the
aspirations of Indigenous Peoples, and agreed on the next steps in the indicator programme. They
also agreed to two additional indicator areas proposed by Ellen Woodley and adopted an eleventh
area concerning food sovereignty. These eleven indicator areas were then consolidated into five
overarching indicator areas. The event was coordinated by the IITC in its capacity as the Focal
Point organization for SARD, Chapter 14 of Agenda 21 within the Indigenous Peoples’ Major
Group of Civil Society, recognized at UNCED (1992), and supported by the FAO-facilitated
SARD Initiative with funding from the Government of Norway and the Christensen Fund.
The paper greatly benefited from constructive comments and inputs provided by the participants
at the 2nd Global Consultation who included, among others, Ratnaker Bhengra, Andrea Carmen,
Estebancio Castro Diaz, Ian Cherrett, Eve Crowley, Mirna Cunningham, Sonia Henriquez de
Gernado, Teobaldo Hernández Thompson, Ron Lameman, Otilia Lux de Coti, Lucy Mulenkei,
Emanuel Nengo, Evon Peter, Manuel Pino, Tarcila Rivera Zea, Ol-Johán Sikku, Paul Smith,
Marcos Terena, Saúl Vicente Vásquez, Tui Aroha Warmenhoven and Ellen Woodley.
Valuable written comments were also provided on that draft by David Boerma, Karel Callens,
Estebancio Castro, Ian Cherrett, Eve Crowley, Stéphane Dandeneau, Rosalud Delarosa, Danielle
Dell’Orco, Jennie Dey de Pryck, Caroline Dookie, Adriana Herrera, Carol Kalafatic, Lidija
Knuth, Margaret MacSems, Luisa Maffi, Denise Martinez, Frances Neely, Bernardo Peredo,
Paola Termine, Fernanda Velasco and Patrizio Warren, while other comments and improvements
were provided by Antonella Cordone, Tamara Jaramillo, Parviz Koohafkan, Stefania Menchinelli,
and Sofia Naranjo.
The draft was then revised by Ellen Woodley to take account of these comments. It was
subsequently further technically revised and partially restructured by Jennie Dey de Pryck who
also added additional material from the literature and requested inputs from the FAO Right to
Food Unit on Indigenous Peoples’ right to food. The authors are grateful to Lidija Knuth for

4

providing these very useful inputs in collaboration with Margret Vidar. Further inputs from FAO
studies for the Commission on the Legal Empowerment of the Poor are also acknowledged.
The paper was jointly commissioned by the FAO-facilitated SARD Initiative and the IITC, with
financial support from the Government of Norway and, indirectly, from the Christensen Fund
who supported the 2nd Global Consultation.

5

Table of contents
Executive summary………………………………………………………………………………..8
Chapter 1 Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems: the need for cultural
indicators........................................................................................................................................13
Chapter 2 Indigenous Peoples’ rights.............................................................................................21
Chapter 3 Development indicators and their relevance to Indigenous Peoples.............................27
Chapter 4 Conceptual framework...................................................................................................32
Chapter 5 Priority areas identified by Indigenous Peoples for indicator development..................37
5.1 Access to, security for and integrity of traditional lands, territories, natural resources, sacred
sites and ceremonial areas used for traditional food production, harvesting and/or gathering and
related cultural and ceremonial purposes.......................................................................................39
5.2 Abundance, scarcity and/or treats to traditional seeds, plant foods and medicines, and food
animals as well as cultural practices associated with their protection and survival.......................45
5.3 Use and transmission of methods, knowledge, language, ceremonies, dances, prayers, oral
histories, stories and songs related to traditional foods and subsistence practices, and the
continued use of traditional foods in the daily diet as well as in relevant cultural/ceremonial
practices..........................................................................................................................................49
5.4 Capacity by Indigenous Peoples for adaptability, resilience and/or restoration of traditional
food use and production in response to changing conditions including migration, displacement,
urbanization and environmental changes.......................................................................................55
5.5 Ability of indigenous Peoples to exercise and implement their rights including selfdetermination and free, prior informed consent as well as their self-government structures, to
promote and defend their food sovereignty and related aspects of their development..................57
Chapter 6 Conclusions and recommendations...............................................................................61
Boxes
Box 1 Culture as the fourth pillar of sustainable development……………………………….…..17
Box 2 Article 11 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights……………..23
Box 3 Poverty indicators in PRSPs: the case of Cameroon............................................................30
Box 4 The Chixoy Dam legacy study.............................................................................................42
Box 5 Self-determination and conservation in Panama and Nicaragua…………....……..…........43
Tables

Table 1 Comparison of the two indicator lists developed at the 2nd Global Consultation on the
Right to Food and Food Security for Indigenous Peoples: Cultural indicators for food security,
food sovereignty and sustainable development ………………………………………………….37
Figures
Figure 1 Plant diversity and language distribution........................................................................14
Figure 2 Sustainable livelihoods framework illustrating how culture cross-cuts all five livelihood
assets..............................................................................................................................................33

References………………………………………………………………………………………64
Appendices
Appendix 1 Glossary of terms……………………………………………………………….…77
Appendix Table 1 Proposed cultural indicators for measuring the state and trends in Indigenous
Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems, rights to food, food security and sustainable
agriculture and rural development............................................................................................80
Appendix Table 2 Indicators table developed at the 2nd Global Consultation on the Right to Food
and Food security for Indigenous Peoples................................................................................86
Appndix Table 3 Consolidated indicators table developed at the 2nd Global Consultation on the
Right to Food and Food Security for Indigenous Peoples........................................................94
Appendix Table 4 Indicadores culturales relevantes de soberania alimentaria de los Pueblos
Indigenas ….….………………………………………………………………………….…..98

7

Executive summary
Purpose: The purpose of the paper is to contribute to the development, collection and use of
cultural indicators of Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems for policy, planning
and advocacy purposes.
Audience: The intended users of this paper are Indigenous Peoples’ Organizations (IPOs),
Government departments responsible for data collection and statistics, UN agencies, NGOs, and
other development actors.
Process of preparing the paper: Indigenous Peoples have expressed growing concern in
international forums that most development planning aims to maximize economic development
and rarely takes into account the reciprocal culture-land/resource relationships that are
fundamental to Indigenous Peoples’ food and livelihood systems and their well-being. These
issues were taken up by the Indigenous Peoples’ Consultation on the Right to Food: A Global
Consultation (17-19 April 2002, Sololá, Guatemala). Organized by the International Indian Treaty
Council (IITC) with support from FAO, the Consultation addressed the issue of cultural
indicators within the context of Indigenous Peoples’ right to food. In follow-up, with support
from the FAO SARD Initiative, the IITC conducted a questionnaire survey in 2003-2004 to
determine Indigenous Peoples’ own views on cultural indicators, and the concerns they should
address related to Indigenous Peoples’ livelihoods, cultures, health and well-being, with a focus
on the relationship between traditional cultural practices and food systems. In 2005, the Fourth
Session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues also contributed to the collaborative work
of the IITC and the FAO SARD Initiative in identifying priorities and developing criteria and
methodologies for cultural indicators of food and agro-ecological systems that reflected
Indigenous Peoples’ perceptions of their situation and experiences. Based on the survey, a
literature review and subsequent discussions, eight indicator categories were proposed for
discussion at the 2nd Global Consultation on the Right to Food and Food Security for Indigenous
Peoples (7-9 September 2006, Bilwi, Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua). The Consultation was
coordinated by the IITC and supported by the FAO-facilitated SARD Initiative with funding from
the Government of Norway and the Christensen Fund. The executive summary of this paper was
presented in draft form at the Consultation. An additional three indicator categories were also
agreed upon by consensus, bringing the total to eleven. These were then consolidated at the
Consultation into five main areas (see Appendix tables 1-3). This paper was subsequently
revised, taking into account decisions made at the Consultation and peer-review comments on the
draft.
Main issues: Globally, there are some 370 million Indigenous Peoples representing at least 5,000
different linguistic groups in more than 70 countries. Indigenous Peoples comprise about 5.5
percent of the world’s population, yet they are disproportionately represented among the poor and
food insecure, in both developed and developing countries. Indigenous Peoples’ relationship with
their traditional lands and territories forms a core part of their identity and spirituality and is
deeply rooted in their culture, language and history. Since land and its resources form the basis
of Indigenous Peoples’ subsistence activities, losing control of these undermines their food and
livelihood security and can threaten their survival as peoples. Furthermore, Indigenous Peoples’
overall health, well-being and cultural continuity are directly related to their ability to eat
traditional foods and continue their traditional food practices. These traditional foods and food
practices are deeply intertwined with their cultures and value systems, and play an important role
in religious ceremonies and spirituality, as well as in songs, dances and myths. While their agro-

8

ecological and food systems offer some signs of resilience and adaptation, a range of factors are
increasingly threatening these systems and Indigenous Peoples’ well-being.
The development of, and agreement on, a set of indicators which are able to measure impacts,
relationships and interactions between culture and food and agro-ecological systems, can promote
improved understanding, transparency and accountability between Indigenous Peoples and those
working to assist and support them. Specifically, they are helpful to:
•

Enable indigenous peoples to monitor the impacts of some key trends and development
interventions on their lives;

•

Assist public services, development practitioners, governments, NGOs and UN agencies
to understand, recognize and respect dimensions of Indigenous Peoples’ livelihoods that
are important for them;

•

Provide decision-makers with the key facts regarding the cultural dimensions of
Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems that are essential for sound and
appropriate policy design;

•

Ensure consistency between activities, goals, outcomes and a minimum acceptable
standard in the policies and programmes that are intended to benefit Indigenous Peoples,
ultimately forming the basis of a more rights-based, culturally-respectful partnership
model for development;

•

Ensure legitimacy and accountability to all stakeholders by identifying good practices,
facilitating lesson-learning as well as measuring progress and achievements.

The paper reviews Indigenous Peoples’ rights, including their right to food, as enshrined in
various UN Declarations, Conventions and Covenants, and summarizes the current work
undertaken by UN and some other international organizations as well as some national agencies
in using cultural and related indicators that are being or could be applied to Indigenous Peoples.
A modified version of the Sustainable Livelihoods framework is proposed as a tool for
understanding the relationships between culture and food and agro-ecological systems and the
ways these interact with the natural environment and the policy and institutional context to
influence livelihood, food security and well-being outcomes.
The indicator areas and main findings: The substantive discussion that forms the core of the
paper (chapter 5) addresses the five consolidated indicator areas (the original eleven areas are also
discussed under the appropriate consolidated indicator area). Evidence from the literature
highlighted the following issues for which cultural indicators to assess trends and impacts on
Indigenous Peoples already exist (but may need to be more widely used) or need to be developed:
1. Access to, security for and integrity of lands, territories, natural resources, sacred sites
and ceremonial areas used for traditional food production, harvesting and/or gathering and
related cultural and ceremonial purposes. The 2007 UN Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples and the 1989 ILO Convention No. 169 call on states to respect indigenous
lands and territories and proclaim the right of Indigenous Peoples to control their natural
resources. Security of tenure, which is crucial to Indigenous Peoples’ cultural identity and wellbeing, can be enhanced through recognition of customary tenure rules and practices. Common
property regimes provide a basis for shared identity and livelihoods and have been found to
contribute to the health status of communities. However, land privatization, titling and
registration programmes can have negative impacts on tenure security and environmental

9

management. Privatization or the granting of concessions by governments or even by Indigenous
Peoples themselves to commercial enterprises for logging, mineral and oil exploitation, hydroelectric dams, plantations or designation as national parks frequently destroys their traditional
food and agro-ecological systems and their cultural identity. At the same time, they are often
deprived of any compensation. Although the right to self-determination is recognized in the UN
Declaration, Indigenous Peoples are rarely consulted during the design of land or water
development or conservation programmes or invited to participate in co-stewardship management
arrangements. The introduction of individualized land holdings in indigenous areas, forced
resettlement, compensation, registration of household heads for taxation or benefit-sharing
purposes, and the availability of jobs in extractive industries have all tended to favour men over
women. The result has been a marked erosion of indigenous women’s rights and resulting poverty
and loss of status. Finally, Indigenous Peoples’ access to sacred sites in their traditional territories
is important for the continuation of their cultural practices. Sacred sites are preserved and
maintained through culturally-based traditional management practices that protect certain species
and habitats and mitigate environmental disturbances such as floods, droughts and fires. In some
areas, however, traditions of maintaining ancient sacred sites are being eroded, leading to the loss
of biodiversity.
2. Abundance, scarcity and/or threats to traditional seeds, plant foods and medicines, and
food animals, as well as cultural practices associated with their protection and survival. The
protection and sustainable management of biodiversity represent an integral part of risk avoidance
mechanisms in indigenous societies. Most traditional food systems of Indigenous Peoples contain
at least 70-100 species of traditional food plants. The Convention on Biodiversity (CBD)
recognizes that traditional and direct dependence on renewable resources and ecosystems,
including sustainable harvesting, continues to be essential to the cultural, economic and physical
well-being of Indigenous Peoples and their communities. However, development does not
necessarily erode traditional ecological knowledge as many societies are able to incorporate
market-oriented production within their traditional resource management systems. Nonetheless,
there is concern that the use of genetically modified (GM) seeds could undermine the livelihoods
of Indigenous Peoples. Genetic Use Restriction Technologies (GURTs), colloquially known as
‘terminator seeds’ could lead to: the possible loss of local crop varieties, locally-adapted genetic
material and wild relatives; the displacement of traditional farming systems and the social,
cultural and spiritual dimensions associated with these, including the storage, exchange and
cultural uses of seeds and seed-bearing plants; and limits on the rights and prerogatives of
indigenous and local communities with regard to traditional knowledge and community cultural
values. Currently, there are insufficient data on the impact of GURTs on agricultural biodiversity
and key ecosystem functions thus, in the meantime, the precautionary principle should apply. The
destruction of forest cover, wetlands and other uncultivated areas for pastures or cultivation can
also lead to a decline in agricultural biodiversity through the loss of ‘wild’ relatives of crop
plants, birds, fish and livestock breeds. Cash cropping systems based on monocultures may
increase economic productivity for large farmers but may prove inefficient in the long term with
pest infestation or as environmental conditions fluctuate. This is where time-tested traditional
crops may in some cases be the most suitable for local ecological conditions. Finally, there is
concern that the WTO Agreement on Agriculture (AOA) has allowed the entry of cheap
agricultural imports into indigenous communities, undermining local production and their
associated integrated and ecologically balanced agricultural practices.
3. Use and transmission of methods, knowledge language, ceremonies, dances, prayers, oral
histories, stories and songs related to traditional foods and subsistence practices, and the
continued use of traditional foods in daily diet as well as in relevant cultural/ceremonial
practices. Disruptions to traditional subsistence activities can restrict Indigenous Peoples’

10

capacity to protect their nutrition and health. Development processes often lead to dietary changes
that result in increased chronic conditions such as obesity and diabetes. Such consequences could
be reduced with more attention to cultural dietary and health principles, and with recognition of
the nutrient properties of traditional food resources. Ceremonies, oral traditions such as stories,
songs and oral histories and other cultural practices such as reciprocity, are important cultural
elements in the maintenance and transmission of knowledge and practices of traditional food and
agro-ecosystems. The loss of these cultural practices creates a disconnect in the relationship
between culture and traditional food systems. However, the impacts of development processes on
these culture-food relationships are mixed. Linguistic and cultural diversity have been threatened
by processes of globalization (such as acculturation, market expansion, biodiversity loss) as well
as through education and assimilation policies and programmes. The loss of indigenous languages
can undermine their ability to maintain their traditional knowledge and food systems. Endogenous
institutions play an important role in ensuring the continuity of traditional food systems and agroecosystems through the transmission of related traditional knowledge, beliefs and practices across
generations, while taking into account the fact that culture is dynamic and changing. In this
context, it is critical to identify factors that interfere with or provide opportunities for elders to
pass on their knowledge to the youth as well as to identify skills, traditional knowledge and
practices that are no longer appropriate to the changing environment
4. Capacity by Indigenous Peoples for adaptability, resilience, and/or restoration of
traditional food use and production in response to changing conditions including migration,
displacement, urbanization and environmental changes. Rapidly increasing rural-urban
migration provides a major challenge to Indigenous Peoples’ adaptive capacity in all regions of
the world. The reasons for migration are varied and include the pull factors of urban amenities
and employment and push factors such as conflict, forced relocation due to land appropriation
(for example, for mining, oil exploration or logging), ecological changes including climate
change, and economic necessity. The move to an urban environment, severing the connection
with the traditional ecosystem and its related culturally-based knowledge and practices can result
in serious acculturation. The capacity of Indigenous Peoples or communities to adapt to changing
circumstances such as expansion in the market economy, dramatic price fluctuations, new job
opportunities in urban areas, loss of traditional land or waterways to mineral or oil exploitation,
logging, plantations or national protected areas, changing political structures, schooling,
environmental degradation and pollution, and climate change varies according to many factors,
including the type, severity and suddenness of the change, threat or risk, their access to resources,
the policy environment and the degree of organization and preparedness.
5. Ability of Indigenous Peoples to exercise and implement their rights including selfdetermination and free, prior and informed consent, as well as their self-government
structures, to promote and defend their Food Sovereignty and related aspects of their
development. Indigenous Peoples’ organizations are concerned that various types of
development activities have had negative impacts on indigenous communities’ traditional food
and agro-ecosystems. Such impacts can only be avoided if development programmes are carried
out with the free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) of the indigenous communities with
traditional rights to the lands, territories or resources concerned. Indigenous Peoples are often
insufficiently aware of their rights, particularly those related to Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
and Access and Benefit-Sharing (ABS) as laid down in various UN treaties and conventions.
Conventionally, IPRs are conferred upon individuals and corporate entities, and are not applicable
in cases of community ownership or spiritual significance of traditional knowledge. However,
Article 29 of the (non-binding) 2007 UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples states
that Indigenous Peoples are entitled to the recognition of the full ownership, control and
protection of their cultural and intellectual property. They have the right to special measures to

11

control, develop and protect their sciences, technologies and cultural manifestation, including
human and other genetic resources, seeds, medicines, knowledge of the properties of fauna and
flora, inland waterway and deep seabed genetic resources, oral traditions, literatures, designs and
visual and performing arts. However, these rights are often not respected. Furthermore, at its VI
session in April 2002, the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity
adopted the Draft Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable
Sharing of the Benefits Arising out of their Utilization. Although they are not binding, they have
the potential to influence the development of national access and benefit-sharing laws. However,
so far, national access and benefit-sharing measures have often failed to compensate Indigenous
Peoples adequately and there is an urgent need to develop fair benefit-sharing with indigenous
communities.
Indicators: The discussions of the issues related to indicator development in each of these five
indicator areas concluded with a brief review of specific existing or potential indicators to
measure trends or the impacts of changes.
Conclusions and recommendations: Indigenous Peoples’ cultural practices and traditional food
systems are mutually supportive and both are vital for their food security and overall well-being,
yet these systems are being degraded or destroyed for a number of reasons discussed in the paper.
Confronted with this situation, Indigenous Peoples are increasingly conscious of the need to
engage in policy dialogue and negotiations with decision-makers to protect their rights and their
food and agro-ecological systems and to restore them where needed. For this, they need good,
reliable data to support their arguments. While a number of UN bodies and specialized agencies,
government agencies and NGOs are involved in the development of relevant indicators, actual
data on Indigenous Peoples’ well-being remain scarce. Hence, the need to develop indicators that
reflect their particular vision and to collect and analyze data on these indicators.
Recommendations are proposed for all stakeholders, as well as specific recommendations for
governments, UN organizations and Indigenous Peoples’ organizations, with a view to improving
the development and application of cultural indicators to Indigenous Peoples’ food and agroecological systems.

12

Chapter 1
Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems: the need
for cultural indicators
1.1 Introduction
Globally, there are some 370 million Indigenous Peoples representing at least 5,000 different
linguistic groups in more than 70 countries (UNESCO 2003, Millennium Ecosystem Assessment,
2005, UNFII, 2007a). Indigenous Peoples comprise about 5.5 percent of the world’s population,
with Asia home to about two-thirds of the indigenous communities. While Indigenous Peoples
often represent the minority population in a country,1 they constitute about 70-80 percent of the
world’s cultural diversity (IUCN, 1997). By economic measures, Indigenous Peoples are
disproportionately represented among the poor and food insecure, in both developed and
developing countries (Psacharopoulos and Patrinos, 1994, Carino, 2005, UNPFII, 2005a).
Indigenous Peoples’ relationship with their traditional lands and territories forms a core part of
their identity and spirituality and is deeply rooted in their culture, language and history. The
“rationale for talking about who they are is tied to the land. They have clear symbols in their
language that connect them to places on their land” (UNPFII, 2007b). Such spiritual, ancestral
and linguistic ties to the land and marine environments are rarely shared by others who utilize
resources primarily for economic return (Mühlhäusler, 1996, Posey, 1999, Nations, 2001). Since
land and its resources form the basis of Indigenous Peoples’ subsistence activities, losing control
of these undermines their food and livelihood security and can threaten their survival as peoples.
Furthermore, Indigenous Peoples’ overall health, well-being and cultural continuity are directly
related to their ability to eat traditional foods and continue their traditional food practices. These
traditional foods and food practices are deeply intertwined with their cultures and value systems,
and play an important role in religious ceremonies and spirituality, as well as in songs, dances and
myths. All these practices have been enriched over the centuries through the abundant
biodiversity in their habitats which they have conserved, protected and managed in order to
produce foods and medicinal plants that are appropriate to specific micro-environments and well
adapted to changing agro-ecological and climatic conditions. As the custodians of biodiversity,
Indigenous Peoples have often sought to transmit their traditional knowledge and genetic
resources from generation to generation. Although the relationship is not causal, sometimes
cultural and biological diversity are correlated. For example, the Amazon River Basin is home to
about 400 different indigenous groups. While the land accounts for just 7 percent of the world’s
surface area, it harbours more than half its biodiversity (IFAD, date n.a.).

1

In several countries, however, Indigenous Peoples account for a large majority of the population, as, for
example, in the Latin American Andean countries, where some of the largest indigenous groups are the
Aymara and Quechua Indians. In Bolivia alone, these Peoples represent 25 and 30 percent respectively of
the total national population of 8 280 000 in 2000 (Encyclopedia of the Nations, 2007).

13

paradigm are undermining or even destroying these traditional systems. Furthermore, forces of
globalization and climate change are having impacts on Indigenous People’s food and agroecological systems that often seem of little concern to governments or are beyond the control of
both governments and Indigenous Peoples. What then are the main threats to the sustainability
of Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems, and the implications for their culture
and identity?
First, a development model that emphasizes economic growth and ignores or disparages cultural
considerations constitutes a major threat. There is a need for a culturally-sensitive development
paradigm that values biological and cultural diversity, and a more holistic concept of well-being
(Kurien, 2001, Rao and Walton, 2004, UNPFII 2005a).
Second, without the free, prior and informed consent of Indigenous Peoples, very substantial
areas of their traditional lands and territories have been privatized or made available to
commercial enterprises through concessions, for logging, plantations, exploitation of minerals,
oil, gas and coal reserves, hydro-electric power plants, or as protected areas or national parks.
This threat is likely to increase as many Indigenous Peoples’ territories still constitute large
reserves of these resources (UNPFII, 2005a, Tauli-Corpuz and Tamang, 2007).
Third, although many countries have introduced constitutional and legal reforms to ensure legal
recognition of Indigenous Peoples’ right to protect and control their lands, territories and
resources and maintain their customary laws (with Latin America leading the way), land-titling
procedures are often slow and complex, and titles awarded to communities are not always
respected in practice. (UNPFII, 2007b)
Fourth, the environmental and genetic sustainability of ecosystems inhabited by Indigenous
Peoples is being threatened by industrial mining and the resulting contamination of forests,
pastures, crop land, waterways and underground aquifers. Agricultural development programmes
introducing non-traditional (cash) crops, including genetically modified crops, that rely heavily
on the use of toxic agro-chemicals have also caused considerable pollution (Stephens et al.,
2006). Forests have often been cleared to make way for pastures for extensive livestock raising or
for (cash) monocropping, replacing the multi-level cropping systems that provide ground cover
and improve soil texture and fertility. These types of activities have often led to soil erosion on a
massive scale. The introduction of genetically modified seeds, monocropping and high-yielding
domesticated animals is destroying the rich biodiversity, leading to the extinction of some seed
varieties and animal species. All of these factors contribute to the destruction of Indigenous
Peoples’ ecosystems, undermining their capacity to maintain the cultivation, fishing, hunting and
gathering of the traditional foods essential for their well-being and the maintenance of the
environment as well as their spiritual, ceremonial and cultural values and practices (UNPFII,
2005b).
Fifth, climate change has uneven effects. Agricultural zones will gradually shift from tropical to
temperate so a loss in one area will thus be a gain for other areas. Climate change has brought
some benefits; for example, in southern Greenland, the growing season is a month longer and
people have begun to plant small gardens. However, the negative impacts are considerably more
serious. Melting ice in Arctic regions, for instance, is having negative impacts on Indigenous
Peoples whose technologies and hunting skills are not adapted to the present, rapidly changing

15

conditions, resulting in some communities facing extinction.2 The diverse genetic rice varieties of
the Subanen community in Lakewood, western Mindanao in the Philippines are threatened with
extinction due to extreme climatic changes. By 2001 75 percent of their rice varieties had
disappeared due to drought in 1997-98 followed by three years of heavy rains (Suminguit, 2005).
Similar patterns are being repeated in many countries as the incidence of climate change-induced
disasters such as rising temperatures, floods, droughts, hurricanes, and tsunamis is increasingly
undermining people’s livelihoods and either destroying or forcing significant changes in farming,
livestock, forestry and fishing practices.3
Sixth, the impacts of globalization, often reinforced by development programmes, have also
resulted in a shift in many indigenous communities from a varied traditional diet to a limited
number of foods, often highly processed and even contaminated, that are sold commercially.
Reliance on these foods has often impoverished Indigenous Peoples’ nutritional status, resulting
in increased obesity, diabetes, vulnerability to diseases and defects in children’s development
(Stephens et al., 2006). Although the traditional food systems are often rich in micronutrients,
these have been poorly analysed by scientists and are often neglected by health and nutrition
programmes (Kuhnlein et al., 2006).
Seventh, Indigenous Peoples’ traditional knowledge and genetic heritage are often exploited for
commercial gain, particularly with the expansion of biotechnology for medicines, while they
receive few or no material benefits and often risk resource depletion and the loss of their food
sovereignty. The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) established principles governing
access to and benefit-sharing from genetic resources and traditional knowledge. Some efforts are
being made to incorporate these into the international intellectual property regime. Paramount are
the requirements to obtain the free, prior and informed consent of Indigenous Peoples for the use
of their traditional knowledge and/or genetic resources, and to establish arrangements to share the
benefits from such developments. Despite examples of fair benefit-sharing, many governments
and private companies do not respect these principles (Dutfield, 1995, Stavenhagen, 2004,
UNPFII, 2007b). Indigenous Peoples are often not aware of their rights and rarely have the
financial means necessary to bring legal action to assert these rights.
Eighth, Indigenous Peoples who live in countries where there are military conflicts are usually
less protected than the rest of the population from the warring parties, and are thus more
vulnerable to physical dislocation, destruction of their ecosystems, and loss of their livelihood
and food security, land and sacred sites. These situations can also destroy their cultural identity
and existence as peoples (Amnesty International, 2001, Stavenhagen, 2007).
1.3 Culture and development
For many years, the complex socio-cultural characteristics of indigenous and local communities’
agro-ecosystems were viewed as obstacles to change. Based on mistaken notions of the ‘tragedy
of the commons’ theory, the common property systems which are fundamental to Indigenous
Peoples’ resource management practices were often considered to be major causes of resource
depletion. For example, Indigenous Peoples were often held responsible for overgrazing, which
2

In 2005 the Government had to fly emergency food to northern Greenland for starving hunting dogs, and
the Inuit hunting communities face extinction (The Guardian Weekly, 5 October 2007).
3
Because of the growing concern about the effects of climate change on Indigenous Peoples’ environments
and ways of life, the Seventh Session of the UNPFII (21 April – 2 May 2008) will be dedicated to the
special theme: Climate change, bio-cultural diversity and livelihoods: the stewardship role of indigenous
peoples and new challenges (www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii).

16

can be a causal factor in the desertification of grasslands or the destruction of the world's forests.
Privatization of resource rights was thus considered necessary for sound ecological management
(Riddell, 2000). The ecologically sound basis of Indigenous Peoples’ customary land rules and
practices was not appreciated. From the 1960s onwards, development was conventionally thought
of in terms of knowledge transfer from industrialized to underdeveloped countries (Stavenhagen,
2000). The futility of this approach, however, soon became apparent in the many failures of the
‘techno-economic’ paradigm of development (Kurien, 2001).
Development policy deliberations are now beginning to give explicit recognition to the
importance of culture for development. The UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), for example, has developed a holistic view of development, emphasizing the
indivisibility of culture and development. The World Bank has acknowledged a constrained
worldview, based on economics, and now recognizes that culture should be taken into account in
examining the challenges of development and assessing the demands of sound economic
strategies (Rao and Walton, 2004). Increasingly there are calls for recognition of culture as a
fourth pillar of sustainable development which both stands on its own and also influences the
other three pillars – economic, social and environmental – that were adopted in the Rio Agenda
21 (see Box 1).
Box 1 Culture as the fourth pillar of sustainable development4
1) The economic pillar represents markets (e.g. for cash and food crops, inputs), food availability, income,
productivity, food prices, etc. In this case, culture defines values of what is exchanged/marketed, who is
involved in exchanges, where exchanges take place and traditional systems of exchange and reciprocity.
2) The environmental pillar of sustainable development includes the biophysical aspects of life, such as
ecosystem services (biodiversity, water quality, carbon sequestration, soil fertility etc), as well as climate
change and natural hazards. In this case, culture defines what part of and how the environment is used, how
people respond to climate variability/shocks, knowledge of and values associated with the environment.
3) The social pillar, which includes organization of labour (rights, obligations and responsibilities between
people), land, natural resources and capital to produce, obtain, distribute and conserve food and manage
agricultural resources, as well as the ability to influence others, protect rights to self-determination and
assert rights and capacity to govern. It is difficult to distinguish culture from this pillar and culture is often
subsumed under the social and not given separate recognition.
4) The cultural pillar includes preferences for crops and foods, knowledge about food, agro-ecosystems
and landscapes, attitudes and values, why people organize, the value/prestige/incentives gained from
involvement in some social organizations, worldview, spiritual and ceremonial values and practices, selfidentity and language. Most of these are non-material and not necessarily utilitarian – in other words, they
are not created for specific purposes unlike social organizations.

Despite growing recognition of the importance of culture in development, many development
interventions are still in need of policy support that minimizes negative impacts on Indigenous
Peoples’ cultural integrity while building on their strengths as stewards of bio-cultural diversity.5
4

Developed by E. Crowley, personal communication, 2006.
The concept of “civic agriculture” coined by Thomas Lyon (2004, cited by DeLind and Bingen, 2004),
which stresses the importance of socio-economic relationships and institutions in sustainable development
and questions “productionist and mechanistic” models of food and farming systems, may be illuminating in
culturally-sensitive local development initiatives. It considers the development of local markets as an
integral part of the local economy, is concerned more with quality than quantity, adding value to local
products which are ecologically and socio-culturally appropriate to the region, is land- and labourintensive, site-specific and relies heavily on the knowledge and meanings that belong to and evolve within
a particular place.
5

17

In this respect, it is useful to keep in mind Indigenous Peoples’ own concept of development, as
expressed at the 2006 2nd Global Consultation on the Right to Food and Food Security for
Indigenous Peoples:
“Development with identity is the project of life of the Indigenous Peoples based on
their own logic and worldview. It is the natural growth of Indigenous Peoples, of
their flora and of their fauna based on principles of self-determination in relation
to land, territories, and natural resources. It is also respect for their individual
and collective rights. It is the welfare and security of our peoples.”

1.4 The role of cultural indicators
Most development planning aims to maximize economic development and welfare and rarely
takes into account the reciprocal culture-land/resources relationships which are fundamental to
Indigenous Peoples’ food and livelihood systems. Thus, conventional definitions of poverty6 and
the indicators used to measure poverty, such as those used by the Commission on Legal
Empowerment of the Poor (CLEP), as well as the indicators used to measure progress towards the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), do not reflect the complexity of Indigenous Peoples’
realities and priorities. They also do not reflect their livelihood strategies and cultures and related
values. Furthermore, cultural statistics largely deal with the production and consumption of
“cultural goods”, such as films, books and theatre, largely neglecting other aspects of culture such
as traditions, ceremonies, food systems and values that interact to define a peoples’ or a
community’s cultural identity. For Indigenous Peoples it is essential to frame the MDGs and other
indicators of well-being as human rights-based, in order to ensure that development processes
take into account basic rights to land and resources, culture, identity and self-determination
(Tauli-Corpuz, 2005, Commonwealth Foundation, 2005).
The development of, and agreement on, a set of indicators which are able to measure impacts,
relationships and interactions between culture and food and agro-ecological systems, can promote
improved understanding, transparency and accountability between Indigenous Peoples and those
working to assist and support them. Specifically, they are helpful to:

6

•

Enable indigenous peoples to monitor the impacts of some key trends and development
interventions on their lives;

•

Assist public services, development practitioners, governments, NGOs and UN agencies
to understand, recognize and respect dimensions of Indigenous Peoples’ livelihoods that
are important for them;

•

Provide decision-makers with the key facts regarding the cultural dimensions of
Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems that are essential for sound and
appropriate policy design;

•

Ensure consistency between activities, goals, outcomes and a minimum acceptable
standard in the policies and programmes that are intended to benefit Indigenous Peoples,
ultimately forming the basis of a more rights-based, culturally-respectful partnership
model for development;

Refer to glossary in Appendix 1 for definitions used in this paper.

18

•

Ensure legitimacy and accountability to all stakeholders by identifying good practices,
facilitating lesson-learning as well as measuring progress and achievements.

A number of methodological problems also need addressing in order to ensure more effective
coverage of Indigenous Peoples’ situations in national surveys and censuses. For example, socioeconomic data collected in population censuses or household surveys are rarely disaggregated by
indigenous/non-indigenous population categories. There is also a need to address the
methodological problems related to the collection of data specific to the conditions of Indigenous
Peoples (Tchoumba, 2005, UNESCO, 2000). Furthermore, there are analytical challenges in
using qualitative data and converting information into statistically useful numbers (UNDP, 2004).
Scale and time are also important considerations in using indicators to measure humanenvironment relationships. Changes in geographical scale, from local to regional or global levels
may significantly influence the questions posed and the information analyzed. For example, local
and traditional knowledge reveals information and understanding that is not measurable at the
global level (Ericksen and Woodley, 2005). Cultural indicators often need to be context-specific.
Studies of cultural influences on subjective indicators of well-being, for instance, have shown that
the determinants of life satisfaction and well-being in one culture are not necessarily the same in
another culture (Moore, Young-Leslie and Lavis, 2005). In Cameroon, for example, the Baka of
Yokadouma or Moloundou, who still depend essentially on the forest and its resources for
survival have a different perception of poverty from the Bagyeli of Kribi for whom agriculture is
more significant or the nomadic Mbororo herdsmen (Tchoumba, 2005). There are problems with
assuming universal needs and transferring a research design which assumes a basic value
consensus in society (i.e. on what poverty is). This underscores the need for each indigenous
community, tribe, village or Nation to select the cultural indicators specific to their conditions and
experience in order to take account of cultural specificities and their changing dynamics (IITC,
2003). Nonetheless, general indicators are important for policy development and to monitor the
trends in the socio-economic and cultural conditions of Indigenous Peoples.
Concerned by the lack of adequate cultural indicators on Indigenous Peoples’ food and agroecological systems, the issue was taken up by the 1st Indigenous Peoples’ Global Consultation on
the Right to Food (Sololá, Guatemala, 17-19 April 2002). Organized by the International Indian
Treaty Council (IITC) with support from the FAO, the Consultation addressed the issue of
cultural indicators within the context of its discussion on the Indigenous Peoples’ right to food.
Two cross-cutting themes were identified: (i) the inter-relationships between the practices and
cultural activities associated with traditional subsistence foods. In essence, how the integrity of
traditional cultures is inter-dependent with local, traditional food systems7; and (ii) the negative
impact that development programmes can have on indigenous communities if they are imposed
without consultation, agreement or participation by the community.
In follow-up, with support from the FAO SARD Initiative, the IITC conducted a survey in 2003
to determine Indigenous Peoples’ own views on cultural indicators, and the concerns they should
address related to Indigenous Peoples’ livelihoods, cultures, health and well-being, with a focus
on the relationship between traditional cultural practices and food systems.8 In 2005, the Fourth
7

Quotations that describe this relationship, gathered from Indigenous Peoples during the 2nd Global
Consultation on the Right to Food and Food Security for Indigenous Peoples, Bilwi, Puerto Cabezas,
Nicaragua, 7-9 September 2006, are given at the beginning of this paper.
8
A total of 115 questionnaires from respondents in 28 countries were received and analyzed. These
activities were carried out in coordination with and the support of the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) and the Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development (SARD) Initiative.

19

Session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues also contributed to the collaborative work
of the IITC and the FAO SARD Initiative in identifying priorities and developing criteria and
methodologies for cultural indicators of food and agro-ecological systems that reflected
Indigenous Peoples’ perceptions of their situation and experiences. Based on the survey, a
literature review and subsequent discussions, eight indicator categories were proposed for
discussion at the 2nd Global Consultation on the Right to Food and Food Security for Indigenous
Peoples (7-9 September 2006, Bilwi, Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua). An additional three indicator
categories were also agreed upon by consensus, bringing the total to eleven (see Appendix tables
1 and 2). These were then consolidated at the Consultation into five main areas (see Appendix
table 3). An example of a possible application of these indicator areas in Nicaragua is given in
Appendix table 4.

1.5 Purpose of the report
The intended users of this report9 are Indigenous Peoples Organizations (IPOs), Government
departments responsible for data collection and statistics, UN agencies, NGOs, and other
development actors. Its aim is to contribute to the development, collection and use of cultural
indicators of Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems for policy, planning and
advocacy purposes. To this end, it specifically sets out to:
1. Draw on evidence from the literature to provide a framework for articulating the complex
relationships between Indigenous Peoples’ traditional food and agro-ecological systems and
their cultures, and the ways in which development processes and the exercise of the right to
self-determination impact on these relationships and on Indigenous Peoples’ food security and
well-being;
2. Present a literature review of the use of cultural indicators in development and provide
practical recommendations to inform future development programmes and policy initiatives of
UN agencies, including FAO, concerned with the livelihoods of Indigenous Peoples;
3. Examine the indicator areas proposed by Indigenous Peoples, and drawing on the literature,
identify other key areas for indicator development; and
4. Make broad recommendations for research and policy design to ensure the development and
use of more culturally-sensitive indicators of development, with particular reference to
Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems.

9

The executive summary of this paper was presented in draft form at the 2nd Global Consultation on the
Right to Food and Food Security for Indigenous Peoples, Bilwi, Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, 7-9
September 2006. The purpose of the Consultation was to bring together Indigenous Peoples’ and UN
representatives to identify gaps in the indicator framework table presented in this paper, reach consensus on
indicators that reflect the aspirations of Indigenous Peoples, and agree on the next steps in the indicator
programme. The event was coordinated by the IITC in its capacity as the Focal Point organization for
SARD, Chapter 14 of Agenda 21 within the Indigenous Peoples’ Major Group of Civil Society, recognized
at UNCED (1992), and supported by the FAO-facilitated SARD Initiative with funding from the
Government of Norway and the Christensen Fund (www.fao.org/sard/initiative).

20

Chapter 2
Indigenous Peoples’ rights
2.1 The United Nations and Indigenous Peoples’ rights
Several UN declarations, covenants and conventions include articles that are supportive of
Indigenous Peoples rights even though some do not refer specifically to Indigenous Peoples.10
The earliest of these, the 1948 Universal Declaration on Human Rights, starts its Preamble with
the “recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of
the human family….”. Although the Declaration is not a binding treaty, international lawyers
consider that it forms part of customary international law and is a key tool in applying diplomatic
and moral pressure on governments violating any of its provisions. In response to the non-binding
nature of the Declaration, two binding Covenants that further developed some of the issues in the
Declaration were adopted in 1966: the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR).
Article 1 is identical in both Covenants and states that “All peoples have the right to selfdetermination. By virtue of that right they may freely determine their political status and freely
pursue their economic, social and cultural development. All peoples may, for their own ends,
freely dispose of their natural wealth and resources… In no case may a people be deprived of its
own means of subsistence.” This Article is regarded by Indigenous Peoples as a key commitment
by States Parties to recognize and protect their right to self-determination and the other rights that
flow from this over-arching right.
While the Declaration and Covenants apply to all peoples, the International Labour Organization
(ILO) has adopted two international legal instruments that specifically deal with Indigenous and
Tribal Peoples’ rights: the Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention, 1957 (No. 107) and the
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169). Convention No. 107 is no longer
open for ratification but remains in force in 18 countries. Designed to replace the earlier
Convention, Convention No. 169 has been ratified by 19 countries as of September 2007.
Convention No. 169 stipulates that Indigenous and Tribal Peoples “shall enjoy the full measure of
human rights and fundamental freedoms without hindrance or discrimination” (Article 3.1). The
Convention also states that Indigenous and Tribal Peoples “shall have the right to decide their
own priorities for the process of development as it affects their lives, beliefs, institutions and
spiritual well-being and the lands they occupy and otherwise use, and to exercise control, to the
extent possible, over their own economic, social and cultural development” (Article 7.1). It
contains seven Articles on land, stipulating, inter alia, that their individual and collective rights to
their traditional lands, territories and natural resources should be protected (Article 14). In cases
in which the State retains the ownership of mineral or other resources in their lands, governments
should consult the concerned peoples before exploiting these resources and the peoples concerned
should participate in the benefits or receive fair compensation for damages they sustain as a result
of such activities (Article 15). Other Articles deal with rights to employment, vocational training,
handicrafts and rural industries, social security, health and education and provisions relating to
participation in decision-making and consultation (MacKay, 2004, ILO, 2007).

10

These are clearly summarized in a paper by MacKay, F., 2004.

21

While Convention No. 107 has similar provisions with regard to land, territories and resources,
Convention 169 constitutes a revision that takes account of developments in the situation of
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, and removes the orientation towards assimilation of the earlier
Convention.
Convention 169 is the most comprehensive instrument of international law for the protection of
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples’ rights to preserve their own laws and customs. It has been
influential in the revision of national constitutions (for example, Bolivia, Mexico and Peru),
changes in laws providing titles for common lands, establishment or strengthening of government
agencies responsible for policies and programmes concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, and
promoting policies and technical assistance programmes by international agencies (ILO, 2007).
Convention 169 is complemented by the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation)
Convention 1958 (No. 111) with regard to the provision of equal opportunity and fair treatment
for indigenous workers, whether they are engaged in wage employment or work in the informal
economy including subsistence agriculture and rural community-based industries. As the latter
Convention is one of the eight fundamental ILO Conventions and has been ratified by 165 States,
it provides an important entry point in many countries through which to address indigenous issues
(ILO, 2007).
The Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the 1993 World Conference on
Human Rights dedicates paragraph 20 to the situation of Indigenous Peoples, reaffirming the
“commitment of the international community to their economic, social and cultural well-being
and their enjoyment of the fruits of sustainable development”. Furthermore, “States should, in
accordance with international law, take concerted positive steps to ensure respect for all human
rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people, on the basis of equality and nondiscrimination, and recognize the value and diversity of their distinct identities, cultures and
social organization”.
In the 1996 World Food Summit (WFS) Plan of Action, governments made a commitment to
“recognize and support indigenous people and their communities in their pursuit of economic and
social development, with full respect for their identity, traditions, forms of social organization and
cultural values” (Commitment 1, Objective 1.1 (d)). There are several references to Indigenous
Peoples, for example, the “production and use of culturally appropriate, traditional and
underutilized food crops” (Commitment 2, Objective 2.3 (c)), sustainable management of fish,
forests and wildlife which are principal sources of protein for Indigenous Peoples, traditional
knowledge (Commitment 3, paragraph 26), and participation in the identification of agricultural
research needs (Commitment 3, Objective 3.4 (d)).
Particular note should be made of the establishment of the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues (UNPFII) in 2000. As an advisory body to the UN Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC), the Forum has a mandate to foster discussions on indigenous issues related to
economic and social development, culture, the environment, education, health and human rights.
It thus provides a global platform for Indigenous Peoples to dialogue with governments and
international organizations.
The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which was approved by the UN
General Assembly on 13 September 2007 after 25 years of debate, represents a significant
landmark in reaffirming the promotion and protection of the basic individual and collective rights
and fundamental freedoms of Indigenous Peoples. Although it is not binding in international law,
it is very important as an aspirational Declaration with considerable political and moral force and

22

is expected to influence the development of national constitutions, legislation, policies and
programmes to take account of its provisions. It did not create any new rights but reaffirmed
rights set out in existing international law and UN declarations which had not been implemented
adequately for Indigenous Peoples. Adopted by a vote of 144 in favour, 4 against (Australia,
Canada, New Zealand and the United States) and 11 abstentions, the Declaration calls for the
maintenance and strengthening of Indigenous Peoples’ cultural identities, their right to selfdetermination (within the territorial and political integrity of the State) and contains provisions,
inter alia, regarding rights to ownership, possession or use of indigenous lands, territories and
resources, protection of cultural and intellectual property, free, prior and informed consent,
maintenance of traditional economic and social structures and self-government.11

2.2 The Right to Food and Indigenous Peoples 12
The right to food is a human right laid down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
several international conventions and covenants. The most important legal basis for the right to
food is found in Article 11 of the 1966 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR)13 which encompasses two elements of the right to food: the right to adequate
food and the right to be free from hunger. The latter is explicitly qualified as a “fundamental”
right and implies immediate obligations on the part of the state.

Box 2 Article 11 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone to an adequate
standard of living for himself and his family, including adequate food, clothing and housing,
and to the continuous improvement of living conditions. The States Parties will take
appropriate steps to ensure the realization of this right, recognizing to this effect the essential
importance of international co-operation based on free consent.
2. The States Parties to the present Covenant, recognizing the fundamental right of everyone
to be free from hunger, shall take, individually and through international co-operation, the
measures, including specific programmes, which are needed:
(a) To improve methods of production, conservation and distribution of food by making full
use of technical and scientific knowledge, by disseminating knowledge of the principles of
nutrition and by developing or reforming agrarian systems in such a way as to achieve the
most efficient development and utilization of natural resources;
(b) Taking into account the problems of both food-importing and food-exporting countries, to
ensure an equitable distribution of world food supplies in relation to need.

The core content of the right to food consists of the following elements: “the availability of food
in a quantity and quality sufficient to satisfy the dietary needs of individuals, free from adverse

11

The countries that voted against the Declaration were basically of the view that it was incompatible with
their national laws. The provisions of particular concern were those on: self-determination, recognition of
indigenous rights to lands without regard to other legal rights existing in land, third party rights and
expansion of the right to free, prior and informed consent.
12
Parts of this section draw on Indigenous Peoples’ Right to Food, by Knuth, L. (FAO, 2007a).
13
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Dec. 16, 1966, Art. 1, U.N.T.S. 3.

23

substances, and acceptable within a given culture; the accessibility of such foods in ways that are
sustainable and that do not interfere with the enjoyment of other human rights.”14
Culturally appropriate foods and the activities to obtain them, such as cultivation, animal
husbandry, hunting, gathering and fishing, form an important part of Indigenous Peoples’ cultural
identity. The cultural acceptability of food is also a core element of the right to food, and is of
particular relevance to Indigenous Peoples. The respect and protection of Indigenous Peoples’
traditional lands, territories, resources and subsistence activities by the state are fundamentally
important for the realization of Indigenous Peoples’ right to food, as they form the basis of their
existence and cultural identity. Thus taking steps to secure access to such resources is a vital
element in the realization of the right to food.
At the 2006 World Food Summit, Heads of State and Government reaffirmed “the right of
everyone to have access to safe and nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and
the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger”. The World Food Summit: five years
later, reaffirmed the importance of strengthening the respect of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms and invited the FAO Council to establish an Intergovernmental Working Group to
develop a set of Voluntary Guidelines to support the progressive realization of the right to
adequate food in the context of national food security (Right to Food Guidelines). The work was
also undertaken in collaboration with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food. The Right to Food Guidelines were subsequently
adopted by the 127th Session of the FAO Council in November 2004.
The Right to Food Guidelines, which elaborate the general human rights obligations into specific
and practical recommendations, refer to “indigenous people’ or ‘indigenous communities’
explicitly in the context of access to resources and assets in guidelines 8.1, 8.10 and 8.12.
Indigenous Peoples are referred to implicitly as members of vulnerable groups in several other
guidelines (3.3, 7.2, 8.2, 8.3, 12.3, 13, 14.4, 15.1, 17.2 and 17.5). The guidelines referring to
vulnerable groups generally point out that states should pay particular attention to their needs or
focus their programmes or other activities on them. Guideline 13.2 is particularly relevant to
Indigenous Peoples because of its call for a disaggregated analysis of the food insecurity,
vulnerability and nutritional status of different groups (including Indigenous Peoples).
Some key implications of the right to food that are relevant to Indigenous Peoples’ food and agroecological systems, and the development of relevant cultural indicators are:


Under the right to food the state is required to collect data disaggregated by ethnicity,
race and indigenous status on issues relevant to the realization of the right to food.
The development of cultural indicators ensures the focus on Indigenous Peoples as a
marginalized and vulnerable group that needs particular attention.



The obligation15 to respect calls for non-interference of states with existing access to
adequate food. If Indigenous Peoples do not have any registered land rights, they
may not be able to claim the respect of their lands, simply because their ownership of
the land or land titles have not been officially recognized. From this it follows that the
State should take steps to recognize and register existing traditional land rights of

14
See General Comment 12, The right to adequate food (Art.11), 12/05/99. E/C.12/1999/5. (General
Comments), para. 8.
15
Under the right to food as under any other human right the State has obligations that are divided
into the three dimensions - to respect, protect and fulfill.

24

Indigenous Peoples.16 For Indigenous Peoples whose culture is closely linked to the
use of their land, the protection of that land is an important obligation of the state in
order to ensure the realization of the right to food.


Better legal protection for Indigenous Peoples’ customary subsistence activities in the
face of increasing competition for access to fish and game, intensifying exploitation
of non-renewable resources, growing environmental pollution and continuing animal
rights activism is a challenge states need to face in order to realize the enjoyment of
the right to food. The (legislative) duty of the state requires the state to adopt and
enforce laws that provide for preferential treatment of Indigenous Peoples’
communities in this arena (affirmative action).

Various countries, in particular Latin American countries, are implanting right to food through
national food and nutrition security legislation. However, national implementation faces obstacles
set by the international economic system. Impediments to effective realization of the right to food
were identified by the Commission on Human Rights Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food,
Mr. Ziegler, who identified seven major economic obstacles that hinder or prevent the realization
of these rights.17
For Indigenous Peoples, the denial of this right to food undermines their identity and survival.
This was poignantly expressed in the Declaration of Atitlán, adopted at the 1st Indigenous
Peoples’ Global Consultation on the Right to Food (Sololá, Guatemala, 17-19 April 2002), which
emphasized “…that the denial of the Right to Food for Indigenous Peoples not only denies us our
physical survival, but also denies us our social organization, our cultures, traditions, languages,
spirituality, sovereignty, and total identity; it is a denial of our collective indigenous existence”.
Indigenous Peoples emphasize that the right to food is a fundamental aspect of human rights,
fundamental freedoms and well-being. They also attach great importance to the concept of “food
sovereignty”, which is defined by the Declaration of Atitlán as:
“the right of Peoples to define their own policies and strategies for the
sustainable production, distribution, and consumption of food, with respect for
their own cultures and their own systems of managing natural resources and
rural areas, and is considered to be a precondition for Food Security” (IITC,
2002).
Since the right to food is a human right, laid down in several international human rights treaties,
in the case of its violation, remedies can be claimed. Food sovereignty, on the other hand, is a
political concept and there is no existing international human right corresponding to the ‘right to
food sovereignty’. This means that from a human rights perspective governments have no legal
obligations, nationally or internationally, under a claim to food sovereignty. While the demands
of the food sovereignty movement are more narrowly focused on requesting governments and
16

See Eide, A., Krause, C. and Rosas, A., eds. 1995. p. 37. Eide draws this conclusion concerning the
obligation of the State to ensure an adequate standard of living.
17
These include problems linked to developments in world trade particularly the agricultural policies of
developed countries which perpetuate malnutrition and hunger in the South; external debt servicing and its
impact on food security, including the structural adjustment programmes of the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), which consistently aggravate undernourishment and malnutrition in debtor countries;
developments in biotechnology, including genetically modified plants, ownership of international patents
by agribusiness from the North, and worldwide protection of these patents, hampering access to food and
the availability of food; access to land and credit; and discrimination against women and its impact on the
realization of the right to food.

25

intergovernmental organizations to support local and national production and citizens’ freedom to
define food and agricultural policies, the right to food is often seen as neutral with regard to
liberal trade policies.18 However, economic and trade policies affecting the right to food have to
comply with the human rights-based approach. This approach requires the application of the
human rights principles of participation, accountability, non-discrimination, transparency, human
dignity and the rule of law (PANTHER). The application of these principles involves identifying
rights holders and their entitlements as well as the corresponding duty bearers and their
obligations. Thus, the public, including indigenous groups, have a real opportunity to shape,
through democratic processes, the strategies, policies and programmes promoting the realization
of the right to food. Therefore, food sovereignty and the right to food should not be viewed as
competing concepts but rather as complementary.

18

The right to food, however, “does not prescribe specific economic policies and is flexible about the
method countries use to achieve food security. It focuses on accountability and participation of the
individual in the political process and redress mechanisms” (FAO, 2007b).

26

Chapter 3
Development indicators and their relevance to Indigenous
Peoples
Specific indicators based on Indigenous Peoples’ understanding of well-being are being
developed by both UN and non-UN agencies in addition to a number of Indigenous Peoples’
organizations. A summary19 of the current work in the field of cultural indicators is provided
below. A list of these indicators is presented in Appendix table 1.

3.1 The use of cultural indicators by the UN System and other international
organizations
There are some promising, though limited, experiences with cultural indicators by UN and other
international organizations, as highlighted below:
i) Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (UNPFII) – The UNPFII is undertaking some
work on indicators of Indigenous Peoples’ well-being. The Fifth session of the UNPFII,
2006, discussed a report on the Meeting on Indigenous Peoples and indicators of wellbeing (Ottawa, 22-23 March 2006) which focused on Indigenous Peoples in developed
countries. Of particular interest and also relevant to developing countries, was the proposal
that “Statistical departments of states should consider evolving their role from a collector
of information to one of facilitator and supporter for indigenous peoples’ collection of their
own information. It was further stressed that indigenous peoples must generate their own
data, since data driven centrally by state policy development consistently raise issues of
trust among the indigenous population”. Indicators relevant to tenure systems proposed by
the UNPFII 5 include traditional land tenure of indigenous and local communities,
movements of indigenous and local communities away from traditional territories, and
impacts of policies and programmes for traditional knowledge retention, language diversity
and rights to land and other resources.
ii) Advisory Group to Article 8(j) and related provisions of the Convention on
Biodiversity (CBD)20 - The CBD’s Akwé: Kon Voluntary Guidelines (CBD, 2004)
centre on impact assessment procedures and methodologies. The proposed indicators
could provide ex-ante information on the likely cultural, environmental and social
impacts of proposed development projects and contribute to preventing their potential
adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the indigenous and local communities concerned
(CBD 2004). Through the impact assessment process, cultural issues to be considered are
“cultural heritage, religions, beliefs and sacred teachings, customary practices, forms of
social organization, systems of natural resource use including land use patterns, places of
19

A concise overview of data collection systems and indicators related to Indigenous Peoples currently
used in the United Nations system is provided by the Inter-Agency Support Group in their paper presented
to the Fifth Session of UNPFII in May 2006 (Inter-agency Support Group, 2006).
20
On the occasion of the 4th meeting of the CBD’s Working Group on Article 8j and Related Provisions
(WG8j) in Granada, Spain, 23-27 January 2006, Indigenous Peoples’ organizations formed the Indigenous
International Forum on Biodiversity Working Group on Indicators to respond to the immediate need to
identify and test indicators relevant to the implementation of the Strategic Plan for the Convention on
Biological Diversity (IIFB, 2006a).

27

cultural significance, economic valuation of cultural resources, sacred sites, ceremonies,
languages, customary law systems, and political structures, roles and customs. The CBD
Secretariat (CBD, 2004) states that the possible impacts on all elements of culture,
including sacred sites, should be taken into consideration while developing cultural
impact assessments.
iii) United Nations University (UNU) - An initiative by the United Nations University
addresses the use of traditional knowledge in intergovernmental processes related to
environmental conservation, sustainable development, human rights, international trade,
and intellectual property. This includes consideration of the drivers of cultural diversity
loss, options for the retention of traditional knowledge, languages and cultural
communities, and scenarios for the impacts of state building and globalization on local
communities (United Nations University, 2005).
iv) UN Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD) - UNRISD’s project on
“Culture and Development” (1996-97) included conceptual and methodological work on
cultural indicators of development. One of the outcomes was a proposal to combine three
indices to produce a composite Cultural Index of Development, which are: i) Cultural
Freedom Index, which could indicate whether a society respects and allows basic human
freedoms of belief, thought and expression; ii) a Creative Empowerment Index, which
could indicate whether a society encourages people to express themselves in innovative
ways; and iii) a Cultural Dialogue Index, which could register the basic opportunities and
means for mutually beneficial communication among people of different cultures
(McKinley, 1997). These could be adapted to indigenous situations. For example, the
first two indices could be adapted to measure the extent of use of cultural practices in
traditional food systems. Similarly, the cultural dialogue index could be used for
measuring the extent to which Indigenous Peoples’ convictions about these food systems
are effectively communicated to and understood and respected by the dominant culture.
v) United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) UNESCO used several indicators in its World 2000 report on Cultural Diversity, Conflict
and Pluralism (UNESCO, 2000). Indicators of possible relevance as cultural indicators
for Indigenous Peoples are: leading languages, national festivals, folk and religious
festivals, progress in attaining the provisions of the UNESCO Convention for the
Safeguarding of the Intangible Heritage (2003) and the Convention on the Protection and
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions (2005).
vi) The Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) has provided data on quality of life
indicators, disaggregated by gender and, for some indicators, by ethnicity (generally
indigenous vs. non-indigenous) for 22 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. These
are available on their comprehensive website (http://www.iadb.org/sds/xindicators). One
indicator which has potential relevance as a cultural indicator for Indigenous Peoples is the
“proportion of population with access to secure tenure (%)”. However, the only available
data for this indicator are for urban, rather than rural populations. For example, in 2002 in
Bolivia security of tenure for the non-indigenous urban population was higher at 37.9
percent compared with 29.9 percent for the indigenous population. Similarly, in 2003, in
Colombia security of tenure was 83.8 percent for non-indigenous and 67.8 percent for
indigenous populations while in Ecuador it was 62 percent and 48.5 percent respectively.21
21

The IADB programme Social Indicators and Equity Information System for Latin America and the
Caribbean provides statistical information for 22 countries since 1990, with more than 80 household

28

3.2 UN system experience with other related indicators
Other development indicators used in assessments of well-being, poverty and progress towards
meeting the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) could be useful for assessing Indigenous
Peoples’ socio-economic and cultural situations including their food security and their agroecosystems if they are disaggregated by indigenous/non-indigenous populations. Some examples
are:
(i) The Human Development Index (HDI), initiated in 1990 by the United Nations
Development Program (UNDP), is a composite index, where indicators focus mainly on
material achievements of creative activity and expression (the arts and participation in these
cultural events). They do not measure the creative achievements of those people that are not
in the market or formal institutions, resulting in a ‘wealth bias’. One indicator of possible use
for indigenous rights to food and food security is “Status of major international human rights
instruments” (number 30 in the HR Index), which indicates what legal or policy frameworks
are in use for the protection of human rights.
The UNDP office in Nicaragua developed a highly relevant list of cultural indicators for food
security. These are in similar categories to the indicator areas developed through the IITC
process, and are shown in Appendix table 4. This list of indicators provides a practical
application of cultural indicators for a specific country and is a test case for the wider
application of these indicators.
ii) Millennium Development Goals (MDGs): The United Nations Millennium Declaration states
that no effort will be spared to achieve respect for all internationally recognized human rights.
This implies that respect for the rights of Indigenous Peoples should be fundamental to
achieving the MDGs (UNPFII 5, 2006). Despite these aspirations, the MDGs are often
considered to be a part of the “meta-narrative” of development orthodoxy, which emphasizes
“an overarching framework linking macro-economic policy, harmonized aid and effective
public expenditure management in support of good governance policies” (Simon Maxwell of
the UK-based Overseas Development Institute (ODI) , cited by Nyamugasira, 2005). Indeed,
indicators used to monitor the achievement of the MDGs could be adapted to be more
inclusive of cultural indicators. For example, to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger (MDG
1) in indigenous communities, it would be vital to deepen the understanding of what poverty
means in these communities, beyond the conventional definition of poverty as low income.
Poverty can mean the lack of access to their traditional lands, territories and foods, and lack of
freedom of cultural, religious and spiritual expression. The concept of basic needs should also
be understood in terms of traditional subsistence economies and not only in terms of market
mechanisms (Tauli-Corpuz, 2005).
iii) Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs): Prepared at the request of the international
finance institutions (World Bank and International Monetary Fund) as part of the debt relief
initiative and supported by a number of bilateral donors, UN organs and bodies, and many
UN specialized agencies, Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs)22 define national
strategies for growth, with special emphasis on poverty alleviation. However, the PRSP
22

PRSPs describe a country's macroeconomic, structural, and social policies, and are designed in
collaboration with civil society. As of early 2001, 31 countries had produced PRSPs, with the support of the
IMF, World Bank, regional development banks, and donors (IMF Factsheet, 2001).

29

methodology has been found to be ineffective for Indigenous Peoples in some countries.
After reviewing PRSPs in ten African countries, the African Forum and Network on Debt and
Development (AFRODAD) reported that processes were so rushed that the extent and quality
of civil society participation was undermined. They recommend that local level capacities
and institutional mechanisms be strengthened for improved stakeholder participation in the
PRSP process (Kapijimpanga, 2005). Tchoumba (2005) reports that some of the indicators
used in PRSPs in Cameroon fell short of identifying Indigenous Peoples’ needs and realities.
The Canadian Council for International Co-operation noted the concern of many civil society
organizations regarding the priority given to PRSPs by the World Bank and the IMF and their
limiting effects on policy choices available to developing countries (Commonwealth
Foundation, 2005). Box 3 provides an analysis of the PRSP report for Cameroon.
Box 3 Poverty indicators in PRSPs: the case of Cameroon
A study undertaken in Cameroon (Tchoumba 2005) within the context of an ILO ‘ethnic audit’ of Poverty
Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) in 14 countries. assessed the degree to which the cultural specificities
of Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Cameroon have been taken into account in national poverty reduction
efforts. The study was conducted in line with the fundamental principles of ILO’s Indigenous and Tribal
Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169). According to the Pygmy and Mbororo Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
participating in the study, a poverty alleviation strategy should recognize and respect: i) customary land
rights; ii) access to citizenship and justice; iii) organizational capacity-building to ensure effective
representation in decision-making processes; iv) effective participation in the management of forest
resources; v) equitable sharing of the benefits from forest exploitation and the conservation of biodiversity;
vi) improvement of agriculture; and vii) culturally appropriate access to basic social infrastructure and
services. These study participants also emphasized that poverty has a socio-cultural dimension which
translates into an incapacity to assume one’s cultural choices, and that appropriate indicators are essential to
capture these cultural dimensions.

3.3 Some national experiences in using cultural indicators
Several national statistical offices and Indigenous Peoples’ organizations also measure aspects of
Indigenous Peoples’ well-being, mainly using conventional indicators (health, education, income,
etc.) disaggregated by indigenous/non-indigenous, but also using some cultural indicators.
i) Australia: The East Kimberley Impact Assessment Project (EKIAP) used innovative
approaches to analyze the impact of mining, tourism and other developments on the East
Kimberley region of Western Australia. Storytelling, for example, was used by Aboriginal
participants to highlight their issues and perspectives (Coombs et al., 1989, Ross, 1989, cited
by O’Faircheallaigh, 1999). However, despite efforts to take account of local perspectives,
there were problems in the social impact assessment process itself, including the extent to
which the process could impact on development outcomes. Similarly, Craig and Tester (1992)
stress that more attention to institutional analysis is required in social impact assessments in
native communities in Canada, since the institutional arrangements within which decisions
are made also need changing in order to affect a change in outcome.
ii) Canada: The Registered Indian Human Development Index (IHDI), a comparative index
developed by Indian and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC) and based on the UNDP HDI,
compares the well-being of indigenous and non-indigenous Canadians. Complementing this is
the First Nations Community Well-Being Index (CWB) which measures the well-being of
individual First Nations communities. While these indexes do not include specific indicators
related to the right to food and food security, there are several cultural indicators. The

30

Assembly of First Nations (AFN) ‘Closing the Gap Reporting Framework’ lists indicators
that measure progress towards achieving a 10-year goal of eliminating poverty and other
significant disparities among First Nations and other Canadians. These indicators of wellbeing also draw on the HDI and other indicators to enable alignment with a broader set of
determinants of well-being (Assembly of First Nations, 2006).
iii) New Zealand: The New Zealand Government’s “Maori Statistics Unit” covers virtually all
facets of Maori life, yet the availability of these data appear to have little influence on
developing policy that reduces socio-economic disparities (A. Mead, personal communication
2006). The Traditional Knowledge Conference for Indigenous Indicators of Well-being
(June 2006, New Zealand) (http://www.traditionalknowledge.co.nz/) identified practices,
models and perspectives for protecting, sustaining and nurturing traditional systems of
knowledge and addressed the questions:
• How do we know that our knowledge, ways of knowing and associated practices are in
a state of well-being?
• What practices do we use to sustain and help the next generation look after our
systems of knowledge?
• How do we know that our relationships, languages, literatures, stories, environments,
healing practices, spiritualities, genealogies, bodies, children, elders, women, men, and
communities are flourishing?
• What are the basic indicators that we use to give us confidence that all is well?
• How do we measure our development and advancement?
Clearly, progress is being made in the collective efforts to generate effective, credible and
representative data on Indigenous Peoples’ situations including the use of cultural indicators
identified by themselves. However, much more work needs to be done. There is considerable
scope for refining existing indicators such as the PRSP and common country assessment
indicators, the MDG indicators, and the human development indices to take account of cultural
considerations. There is also a need to ensure disaggregation by indigenous and non-indigenous
populations when using these existing indicators. These efforts also provide a useful structure
within which to place additional cultural indicators that measure the status of Indigenous Peoples’
traditional food and agro-ecological systems.

31

Chapter 4
Conceptual Framework
A modified version of the Sustainable Livelihoods (SL) framework23 is presented in this chapter
(see Figure 2) as a tool for understanding relationships between culture24 and food and agroecological systems. It also assists in understanding the ways in which these interact with the
outside environment – both the natural environment and the policy and institutional context – to
influence livelihood, food security and well-being outcomes. Its application to the development
of cultural indicators to measure these outcomes for Indigenous Peoples is also explored.
The Vulnerability Context refers to events and trends that undermine livelihoods and wellbeing. These can be unpredictable and sudden (such as earthquakes, forest fires and mud slides)
or slower acting (such as soil erosion, contamination of water sources by mining or oil drilling
enterprises, climate change impacts or loss of cultural integrity and identity as Indigenous Peoples
assimilate into a dominant culture). Some shocks and stresses can originate outside the
community, affecting everyone in the locality, while others such as illness or a death in the family
may only affect some individual households. The degree of vulnerability or resilience to change
induced by trends, shocks and seasonality are also influenced by the amount and relative
importance of each type of capital in the asset pentagon. The original SL framework also
considers the effect, if any, that culture has on the way people manage their assets and the
livelihood choices they make (Carney, 1998). Cultural coherence and unity can play a key role in
providing a strong response on the part of an entire Indigenous People or a particular indigenous
community in ensuring better preparation for an emergency situation or a rapid response to an
actual crisis.
In the original SL framework, culture is also included in the Policies, Institutions and
Processes25 box,26 which refers to the institutions, organizations, policies and legislation that
shape livelihoods. These determine access to the different types of capital, to livelihood strategies
and to decision-making bodies and sources of influence. They also provide the context – or
governance structure –within which organizations operate. Processes include institutions,
legislation, culture and power relations. The organizations that have developed and applied SL
analyses have generally not given particular emphasis to culture. Examples of culture that this
paper proposes for consideration include (i) cultural norms, beliefs and values, (ii) socio-cultural
institutions such as kinship, marriage, inheritance, religion, draught oxen sharing (FAO, 2005)
23

Sustainable livelihoods approaches were developed in the 1990s by a number of organizations including
the UK Department for International Development (DFID), research institutes (e.g. the Institute of
Development Studies, Sussex), NGOs (e.g. CARE and Oxfam) and UN programmes and agencies (e.g.
UNDP). It has subsequently been used and adapted by various development agencies around the world.
DFID undertook an intensive programme to refine the concepts and approaches and to operationalize them
at the country-level (Ashley and Carney, 1999). From 2000 onwards DFID also provided support for a
number of years to various UN agencies, including FAO and IFAD, to develop and apply these approaches.
This chapter also draws on A. Carloni (FAO, 2005).
24
Culture refers to “shared beliefs, values, traditions, customs, language, knowledge and ceremonies that
people transmit across generations and use to define their collective relationships with each other and the
world” (FAO, 2007c).
25
Also referred to as ‘Transforming structures and processes’.
26
The CARE livelihood framework clusters economic, culture and political influences in the “context”
(Ashley and Carney, 1999).

32

Figure 2 Sustainable livelihoods framework illustrating how culture cross-cuts all five livelihood
assets

Livelihood Assets

Vulnerability
Context
Shocks
Trends
Seasonality

Policies,
Institutions,
Processes

H
F

N
P

I
N

Levels of
government

S

Influence
& access Private

sector

Livelihood
Strategies

Laws
Culture

Policies
Institutions

CULTURE

Livelihood
O Outcomes
R
D More income
E Increased wellR Being
Reduced

T vulnerability
O
A
C
H
I
E
V
E

Improved food
security
Sustainable
use of NR base

Language / Worldview / Traditional knowledge /
Spirituality / Identity / Attitudes, values,
beliefs / Social life / Artistic expression

F:
Informal
economy

H:

Knowledge and practices related to the procurement
of traditional subsistence foods
N: Access to land and freedom to choose crops

P:
Access to clean
& abundant water
supply

S: Communal management of land for
crop production, organization of
labour, kinship and alliances, cultural &
religious practices, resilience

Key:
H = Human capital N = Natural capital
Physical capital NR = Natural resource

F = Financial capital

S = Social capital

P=

The top portion of Figure 2 shows the SL framework as developed by the UK Department for
International Development (DFID, 2000). Examples of relationships between culture and the five
assets which influence and are influenced by the other elements in the framework are shown in
the lower part of the diagram.

33

The Vulnerability Context refers to events and trends that undermine livelihoods and wellbeing. These can be unpredictable and sudden (such as earthquakes, forest fires and mud slides)
or slower acting (such as soil erosion, contamination of water sources by mining or oil drilling
enterprises, climate change impacts or loss of cultural integrity and identity as Indigenous Peoples
assimilate into a dominant culture). Some shocks and stresses can originate outside the
community, affecting everyone in the locality, while others such as illness or a death in the family
may only affect some individual households. The degree of vulnerability or resilience to change
induced by trends, shocks and seasonality are also influenced by the amount and relative
importance of each type of capital in the asset pentagon. The original SL framework also
considers the effect, if any, that culture has on the way people manage their assets and the
livelihood choices they make (Carney, 1998). Cultural coherence and unity can play a key role in
providing a strong response on the part of an entire Indigenous People or a particular indigenous
community in ensuring better preparation for an emergency situation or a rapid response to an
actual crisis.
In the original SL framework, culture is also included in the Policies, Institutions and
Processes27 box,28 which refers to the institutions, organizations, policies and legislation that
shape livelihoods. These determine access to the different types of capital, to livelihood strategies
and to decision-making bodies and sources of influence. They also provide the context – or
governance structure –within which organizations operate. Processes include institutions,
legislation, culture and power relations. The organizations that have developed and applied SL
analyses have generally not given particular emphasis to culture. Examples of culture that this
paper proposes for consideration include (i) cultural norms, beliefs and values, (ii) socio-cultural
institutions such as kinship, marriage, inheritance, religion, draught oxen sharing (FAO, 2005)
and reciprocal labour, and (iii) cultural practices such as oral history, songs, myths, dances,
religious and spiritual ceremonies. By expanding in this way the concept of culture that is used in
the SL framework, the relationships between culture and all five assets and their influence on
subsequent livelihood outcomes are made more prominent. The framework can also serve to
enrich understanding of the specific relationship of culture to food security as a livelihood
outcome. Thus culture is also central to the policies, institutions and processes box.
Furthermore, there are important two-way relationships between culture and the assets pentagon
that influence livelihood strategies and livelihood outcomes. These relationships are explored
below. Although the indicator areas identified during the 2nd Global Consultation on the Right to
Food and Food Security for Indigenous Peoples (Nicaragua, 2006), that are the focus of this
paper, will be dealt with in more depth in Chapter 5, some suggestions are given below as to
how they relate to the five livelihood assets. Some illustrative examples of their relevance to
Indigenous Peoples are also given.
Natural capital refers to land and other natural resources on which Indigenous Peoples depend
for food production, hunting and gathering or fishing and the biodiversity used directly for
production. Culture is an integrating factor: Indigenous Peoples’ relationships with their
traditional lands and territories form a core part of their cultural identity and spirituality and are
deeply rooted in their culture, language and history. Their rights to their lands, territories and
natural resources are considered to be part of the definition of their identity. As custodians of the
land, Indigenous Peoples are also stewards of the environment, seeking to nurture biodiversity,
ensure sustainable environmental management and protect their sacred sites. This aspect of
27

Also referred to as ‘Transforming structures and processes’.
The CARE livelihood framework clusters economic, culture and political influences in the “context”
(Ashley and Carney, 1999).
28

34

natural capital is often overlooked in the prevailing development paradigm in which land and
other forms of natural capital (forests, fish stocks, water, oil and minerals) are largely regarded as
commodities and are considered sources of financial capital, to be exploited, bought or sold for
financial gain. Thus land has a much broader meaning for those with spiritual, ancestral and
linguistic ties to the land.29 For many Indigenous Peoples secure access to land means more
control over their lives and their identity as Indigenous Peoples. The natural capital-culture
relationship has implications for well-being, improved food security and sustainable use of the
natural resource base, all key goals in the livelihood outcomes box.
The identified indicator areas that are most closely related to natural capital are:30
1. Access to, security for and integrity of lands, territories, natural resources, sacred sites and
ceremonial areas used for traditional food production, harvesting and/or gathering and
related cultural and ceremonial purposes. This indicator area emphasizes the integrity of
lands, territories and natural resources.
2. Abundance, scarcity and/or threats to traditional seeds, plant foods and medicines, and food
animals, as well as cultural practices associated with their protection and survival. This
indicator area focuses on threats to local biodiversity and the availability of diverse gene stocks
to ensure sustainable harvests. This indicator area also relates closely to the ‘vulnerability’
context, which frames the external environment in which people exist and over which people
have little control, such as population movements and changes, national and international
economic trends and shocks, trends in governance, land conversion and loss of habitat,
conflict, human health shocks, climate change and seasonality of production.
Human capital refers to education, knowledge and skills and active labour. It is influenced by
the cultural norms and values that shape the goals and approaches used in education and health
services and programmes, in addition to the content, stewardship and inter-generational
transmission of traditional knowledge and skills. Knowledge derived from a close historical
relationship to the land is culturally based. Traditional education through which this knowledge is
acquired is largely experiential and places the learner directly in contact with the environment.
The human capital of traditional or local knowledge gained by daily interaction with this
environment includes the varied aspects of land and resource preservation and management,
knowledge of medicinal plants, protection of biodiversity, custody of sacred sites and knowledge
of religious ceremonies. Human capital also includes the knowledge of languages and the
knowledge maintained through language, including through stories, oral histories, songs and
myths. All of these aspects, which for Indigenous Peoples are associated with daily use of their
agro-ecosystems, have been refined and adapted over the years in culturally significant ways, and
thus have a critical bearing on their livelihood outcomes.
Indicator areas that best describe human capital are areas:

29

Other conceptual frameworks incorporate culture and rights as integral to human-environment
relationships. For example, the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA) draws on a conceptual
framework that incorporates secure resource access and freedom of choice and action as constituents of
well-being. This framework was adapted by the Quechua in Peru to reflect their world view which
emphasizes the importance of the cultural element of reciprocity in human-environment relations.
30
The indicator areas used in this section correspond to the consolidated list of five indicator areas agreed
at the 2nd Global Consultation on the Right to Food and Food Security for Indigenous Peoples (Bilwi,
Puerto Cabeza, Nicaragua, 2006). For the list of these five indicator areas and their relationships to the
longer list of 11 indicator areas, refer to Table 1.

35

2. Abundance, scarcity and/or threats to traditional seeds, plant foods and medicines, and food
animals, as well as cultural practices associated with their protection and survival. The
availability of or threats to these resources and cultural practices have a bearing on Indigenous
Peoples’ existing knowledge and skills related to their food and agro-ecological systems and
opportunities for adaptation
3. Use and transmission of methods, knowledge, language, ceremonies, dances, prayers, oral
histories, stories and songs related to traditional foods and subsistence practices, and the
continued use of traditional foods in daily diet as well as in relevant cultural/ceremonial
practices. Local knowledge of biodiversity in local agro-ecosystems is an essential “asset” to
ensure sustainable management of resources.
Social capital refers to kin networks, group membership in formal or informal organizations,
socio-political voice and influence. Culture is often considered one aspect of social capital. The
networks and institutions that people rely on to attain their livelihood objectives form the link
between social capital and culture. Culture provides the values and principles that underlie, within
these networks and institutions, adherence to mutually-agreed upon or commonly accepted rules,
norms and sanctions, relationships of trust, reciprocity and exchanges that facilitate co-operation
(DFID, 2000). The equitable and sustainable management of common property resources found
in many indigenous agricultural, pastoralist and fishing communities is a form of social capital
that provides a basis for sustainable livelihoods and shared cultural identity. Sadly, the social
capital inherent in customary land tenure systems can be destroyed by land privatization schemes
that operate by other values and rules.
The indicator areas related to social capital are indicator areas:
1. Access to, security for and integrity of lands, territories, natural resources, sacred sites and
ceremonial areas used for traditional food production, harvesting and/or gathering and
related cultural and ceremonial purposes. Indicator area 1 addresses norms and sanctions
regulating land use and the social institutions (such as religious ceremonies) that represent the
complex cultural relationship to land.
3. Use and transmission of methods, knowledge, language, ceremonies, dances, prayers, oral
histories, stories and songs related to traditional foods and subsistence practices, and the
continued use of traditional foods in daily diet as well as in relevant cultural/ceremonial
practices. This indicator area is concerned with the transmission of knowledge and practices
related to food, emphasizes the links between this knowledge and the formal and informal
social institutions that are in place to conserve and transmit this knowledge to future
generations.
4. Capacity by Indigenous Peoples for adaptability, resilience, and/or restoration of traditional
food use and production in response to changing conditions including migration, displacement,
urbanization and environmental changes. This indicator area attempts to capture the level of
resilience that is harnessed or developed within communities to cope with socio-ecological
change.
5. Ability of Indigenous Peoples to exercise and implement their rights including selfdetermination and free, prior and informed consent, as well as their self-government
structures, to promote and defend their Food Sovereignty and related aspects of their
development. This indicator area represents an element of social capital because respect for
customary laws and local governance that fosters self-determination is critical for maintaining
cultural identity and achieving food sovereignty.
Physical capital is an asset that comprises the basic infrastructure, equipment and producer
goods needed to support livelihoods, including affordable transport, secure shelter and buildings,
adequate water supply and sanitation, clean, affordable energy and access to information and

36

communications networks. It can also include the boats, livestock31 and work animals (donkeys,
horses, dogs) that are essential to some Indigenous Peoples’ livelihoods. Cultural values and
practices directly influence the type of physical assets bought or produced by Indigenous Peoples.
They also influence the ways they are used; for example, the infrastructure and equipment used
for protecting and accessing precious water supplies for domestic, animal or agricultural use.
There is also a cultural dimension to the use of energy-intensive inputs such as fertilizers and
pesticides in food production.
Financial capital in the form of cash, savings or loans is less relevant to traditional subsistencebased cultures. However, financial capital may also refer to livestock, seed stocks and gold and
jewellery (that can be easily sold for cash). Even in subsistence economies, Indigenous Peoples
require some cash to purchase inputs or consumption goods that they cannot produce themselves,
and to have the freedom to choose the ways in which they wish to ensure their food and
livelihood security and well-being.
Culture thus cross cuts all five assets in the SL framework, influences the vulnerability context,
and plays a critical role in mediating appropriate enabling policies, institutions and development
processes to ensure livelihood outcomes that meet the cultural aspirations of Indigenous Peoples.

31
Livestock, which are raised by humans, can be seen as physical capital (FAO, 2005). As they are also an
important source of cash from the sale or hire of animals or their products, they can also be seen as
financial capital (Livestock in Development, 1998). Wildlife, which exists independently of human action,
is seen as natural capital (Carney, 1998, FAO, 205).

37

Chapter 5
Priority areas identified by Indigenous Peoples for indicator
development
The indicator areas that are presented in this paper are the product of a process of the two Global
Consultations, the IITC-administered questionnaire and the literature review that was the
background to this paper. The different Appendix tables are products of different phases of this
process. As mentioned in section 1.4, the eleven areas for indicator development (see Appendix
tables 1 and 2) that were identified during this process were subsequently condensed at the 2nd
Consultation into five main areas in order to facilitate their further refinement and data collection
and analysis (Appendix table 3).32 These indicator areas represent three interconnected cultural
subsystems: the food and agro-ecological system, the land/resource tenure system and the
knowledge/practice/language/worldview system. A summary table listing these five areas and the
corresponding indicator areas from the longer list is given below (Table 1) to provide the
framework for the following discussion.
This purpose of this section is to i) provide evidence from the literature on the issues related to
these priority areas; ii) list indicator areas that are being developed by other agencies; and iii)
suggest additional indicators based on supporting literature. Since few data have been collected
on these indicator areas, there is a need to promote the collection and analysis of data and, where
appropriate, to further refine the indicators.
Table 1 Comparison of the two indicator lists developed at the 2nd Global Consultation on the
Right to food and food security for Indigenous Peoples: cultural indicators for food security, food
sovereignty and sustainable development
Consolidated list of cultural indicator areas

Longer list of cultural indicator areas

(See Appendix table 3)

(See Appendix table 2)

1. Access to, security for and integrity
territories, natural resources, sacred sites and
areas used for traditional food production,
and/or gathering and related cultural and
purposes

of lands,
ceremonial
harvesting
ceremonial

2. Abundance, scarcity and/or threats to traditional seeds,
plant foods and medicines, and food animals, as well as

1. Access to, security for and integrity of lands, territories
and natural resources for traditional food production,
harvesting and/or gathering
6. Integrity of and access to sacred sites for ceremonial
purposes related to use of traditional foods
2. Abundance, scarcity and/or threats to traditional seeds,
plant foods and medicines, and food animals, as well as

In Appendix tables 2 and 3 the indicators are ordered by categories depending on whether they are
structure, process or response indicators. Structure indicators are, for example, ratification of international
human rights instruments and existence of mechanisms for access to the justice system. Process indicators
are, for example, the existence of and access to information relating to policy instruments and programmes
for the protection and progressive realization of Indigenous Peoples’ economic, social, cultural, civil and
political rights. Outcome indicators measure the impacts of development initiatives.
32

38

cultural practices associated with their protection and
survival

cultural practices associated with their protection and
survival

3. Use and transmission of methods, knowledge
language, ceremonies, dances, prayers, oral histories,
stories and songs related to traditional foods and
subsistence practices, and the continued use of traditional
foods in daily diet as well as in relevant
cultural/ceremonial practices

3. Consumption and preparation of traditional plant and
animal
foods
and
medicines,
including
in
ceremonial/cultural use as well as daily household use
4. Continued practice and use of ceremonies, dances,
prayers, songs and stories and other cultural traditions
related to the use of traditional foods and subsistence
practices
5. Preservation and continued use of language and
traditional names for foods and processes (planting,
hunting, gathering, harvesting, fishing, food preparation
etc.)
9. Existence and viability of mechanisms and institutions
created by and accessible to Indigenous Peoples for
transmission of food related traditional knowledge and
practices to future generations

4. Capacity by Indigenous Peoples for adaptability,
resilience, and/or restoration of traditional food use and
production in response to changing conditions including
migration, displacement, urbanization and environmental
changes

7. Migration and movement away from traditional lands
as a result of rural-to-urban migration, conflict, forced
relocation, land appropriation, climate change, and
economic necessity; return patterns and relationships to
continued use of traditional foods
10. Capacity within Indigenous communities and Peoples
for adaptability, resilience, resistance and/or restoration
of traditional food use and production in response to
changing economic, political and/ or environmental
conditions

5. Ability of Indigenous Peoples to exercise and
implement their rights including self-determination and
free, prior and informed consent, as well as their selfgovernment structures, to promote and defend their Food
Sovereignty and related aspects of their development

8. Effective consultations for planning, implementation
and evaluation applying the principles of free, prior and
informed consent and full participation by community
members when development programs are implemented
by states, outside agencies or other entities and the extent
to which cultural concerns are considered and addressed
11. Ability of Indigenous Peoples to utilize and
implement recognized rights, legal norms and standards
as well as self-government structures to promote and
defend
their
Food
Sovereignty
on
the
local/tribal/community, national and international levels

The rest of this chapter explores in detail the 5 indicator areas in the first column of Table 1, as
well as their relationship to the more detailed set of 11 indicators and the findings of the literature
review. Evidence drawn from the literature is presented in order to substantiate the importance of
these indicator areas for Indigenous Peoples.

39

5.1 Access to, security for and integrity of lands, territories, natural resources, sacred sites
and ceremonial areas used for traditional food production, harvesting and/or gathering and
related cultural and ceremonial purposes
5.1.1 Access to, security for and integrity of lands, territories and natural resources for
traditional food production, harvesting and/or gathering (Indicator area 1 in the set of 11
indicator areas)
The 2007 UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and the 1989 ILO Convention No.
169 call on states to respect indigenous lands and territories and proclaim the right of Indigenous
Peoples to control their natural resources.
The relationship between security of land tenure and cultural identity and well-being is well
established. In many societies, culture and land are inextricably related (Baranyi and Weitzner,
2006) and land is regarded as the “lifeblood of the people”, providing the necessities of life and
defining the cultural identity of every person (Putupen, 2001 cited by Nichols, 2002:147). In
2003, the National Chief of the Assembly of First Nations (AFN) included language and culture,
land claims and environment as key determinants of First Nations’ well-being. For many people,
having land rights in their natal area is part of their definition of self; the land does not belong to
them, but they belong to the land (Benwell et al., 1997 as cited by Riddell, 2000). Sixty-three
percent of First Nations respondents to a 2002 public opinion poll identified the loss of land and
culture as significant contributors to their poorer health status (NAHO, 2003).
The Commission on Human Rights proposed a framework for the analysis of contemporary
problems regarding indigenous land rights and highlighted the failure to recognize, implement
and enforce rights to lands, territories and resources as well as the failure to protect the integrity
of the environment of indigenous lands and territories (Tebtebba Foundation, 2002). In this
context, there is a need for the development of indicators and the collection of related data on
Indigenous Peoples’ land rights and security of tenure. Few, if any, comprehensive studies or
surveys exist. The Commission on the Legal Empowerment of the Poor is attempting to fill this
gap, among its other objectives, with studies on Indigenous Peoples’ land rights. It is hoped that
the recently launched Global Land Tool Network (GLTN),33 which aims to facilitate the
attainment of the MDGs through improved land management and tenure tools for poverty
alleviation and the improvement of the livelihoods of the poor, will also contribute to filling this
gap. However, the GLTN website indicates that the Network’s focus is primarily on urban land
and no specific reference is made to Indigenous Peoples.
(a) Land titling and registration.
Central to this priority area for indicator development is security of tenure,34 that is inalienable
access to and control over land, water, and other natural resources. The concept of tenure
security35 is complex and generally involves bundles of different rights (such as rights of access,
33

UN-HABITAT, together with the World Bank and the Swedish International Development Agency
(SIDA) initiated the Network idea. It is based in UN-HABITAT, and works with a number of partner
organizations.
34
Measures of tenure security depend on the way the rules of tenure are legitimized, respected and
implemented within a given society.
35
Tenure security may also depend on the legal and regulatory environment, local and national
governmental institutions (local courts, tax and conflict management institutions) and self-governance. The
concept is multifaceted and is not easy to operationalize.

40

passage, seasonal grazing, cultivation, tree planting, gathering or use of wild products and transfer
through inheritance, loan or sale) which are usually applied to specific resources, and can vary
over time. In order to appreciate the diversity of tenure regimes and identify effective responses
to local specificities and complexities, it is useful to distinguish between the different component
tenure niches36 in a community’s landscape (Bruce, 2000).
The key issues concern the registration of Indigenous Peoples’ traditional lands, recognition of
the customary tenure rules and practices that govern their use, and the privatization of their lands
(often against their wishes) through the granting of legal titles to individual owners. 37
The effectiveness and sustainability of collective land tenure systems are directly affected by the
extent to which these systems are given legal recognition, indigenous knowledge is respected and
customary law is allowed to operate (Colchester et al., 2004). In these systems, access to land is
generally based on culturally-defined rules of land inheritance or use rights (by lineage, gender,
marriage, residence, age and other culturally-based characteristics). Common property systems
provide a basis for shared identity and livelihoods and have been found to contribute to the health
status of communities. For example, Indigenous Peoples in Pacific Island States include
customary tenure as hallmarks of national identity in their constitutions and laws. Bromley and
Cernea (1989, cited by Esmail, 1997) found that the breakdown in Indigenous Peoples’ common
property regimes and traditional customs and beliefs contributed to resource degradation, thus
leading the authors to conclude that aspects of culture may provide a stronger conservation
incentive for some types of common property regimes than market logic (see also Richards, 1997
cited by Esmail, 1997, Tucker, 2004). In some cases where indigenous common property
regimes have not been recognized there is a high degree of tenure insecurity and chaotic, open
access systems have resulted. In these situations, state control is often seen as the solution (Bruce,
1996). Thus, it becomes critical to understand customary laws, kinship rules and other aspects of
culture that govern rights of access to land in order to formulate appropriate rural development
and land registration policies.
Evidence suggests that land privatization and titling policies and programmes often have negative
impacts on Indigenous Peoples’ tenure security and well-being, as a series of recent studies of
land titling and registration in Latin America found (Inter American Development Bank, 20047).38 The situation appears to be similar in other regions also (UNPFII, 2007b). For example, the
status of common property regimes in the drylands of India were severely weakened by the
introduction of land reforms, the replacement of traditional village leadership with elected village
councils, expanded private ownership, expanded credit and subsidies for animals, and more
marketing links for CPR-related products. This had the effect of decreasing the regulation of
common land use and expanding private ownership of land (Jodha, 1990, FAO, 1998). Increased
private ownership of land resulted in the rural poor (including Indigenous Peoples) taking
measures that reflected desperation such as premature harvesting of CPR products, the removal of
roots/base of plants, overcrowding and overexploitation of CPRs and the use of inferior

36

A tenure niche is a discrete area of land within a landscape defined by the specialized set of tenure rules
that are applied to it (Fortmann and Nhira, 1993, as cited by Bruce, 2000).
37
The 2006 International Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (ICARRD) recognized
the need to establish administrative systems conducive to efficient registering, titling and surveying of land
holdings, and ensure the formal recognition of customary and communal use rights in ways that are
transparent, enforceable and consistent with community interests.
38
Inter American Development Bank - www.iadb.org/sds/xindicators - various studies on land
titling and registration were published between 2004-2007.

41

products.39 Griffiths and Colchester (2000) also found that imprecise legalities together with
thriving land and timber markets in India have led to rapid deforestation, rising concern about soil
erosion, the emergence of village elites, growing social inequalities, privatization of communal
land and intra-community land conflicts.
Fortunately for Indigenous Peoples, certain common pool resources are difficult or very costly to
individualize and are best left in communal ownership. Examples include resources that cross
boundaries (water courses, fish and migratory wildlife) or long-term investment in trees that have
high management and opportunity costs which are more easily borne by a community than a
household or individual (Bruce, 1999). Land privatization in arid grassland environments, where
the herders’ movements are determined by highly variable rainfall patterns and seasonal
variations in resources, would require the establishment of a source of water for each discrete
grazing unit. Since the costs would be too high for small stockowners, individualization of such
resource rights is clearly unsustainable (Riddell, 2000).
However, studies carried out in Kenya on pastoralist livelihoods as a contribution to the work of
the Legal Commission on the Empowerment of the Poor indicate increasing impoverishment of
pastoralists as a result of land sales, land-grabbing by powerful elites, and erosion of pastoralist
livelihoods and culture. The privatization and sub-division of land, encouraged by laws that
promote individual tenure, are probably the greatest threats faced by pastoralist communities in
Kenya (Verma, 2007).
The complexity of land tenure issues and multiple access rights to the same piece of land or
natural resources, particularly under customary tenure systems, make it difficult to identify
indicators that will adequately capture the status and trends of Indigenous Peoples’ tenure
security. However, some indicators have been proposed by different agencies (see Appendix
table 1) to measure the extent to which Indigenous Peoples have ‘ownership’40 of lands (including
marine territories), and what governance systems, customary laws, traditional ecological
knowledge and legal frameworks are recognized by state governments and successfully
implemented. Other indicators include the prevalence of land disputes and the status (recognition
and implementation) of major international human rights instruments with regard to land.
(b) Land alienation for concessions and protected areas
Large areas of Indigenous Peoples’ lands and territories have been privatized or made available
by governments or even Indigenous Peoples themselves to commercial enterprises through
concessions for logging, mineral and oil exploitation, hydro-electric dams, plantations or are
designated as protected areas, for example, as national parks. Indigenous Peoples, as the
traditional owners, often receive no compensation although such land alienation frequently
completely destroys their traditional food and agro-ecological systems and their cultural identity.
For example, in Viet Nam in the 1990s extensive areas of indigenous lands and forests were
converted into coffee plantations largely owned by rich lowlanders based in Saigon. Massive
protests by Indigenous Peoples took place in 2000 and afterwards. Indigenous Peoples cut down
coffee trees and replanted their food crops, demanding that the government recognize and secure
their land rights (UNPFII, 2005a). The pastoralist Maasai Peoples in Kenya and Tanzania have
seen their grazing lands taken over by settler farmers and converted into agricultural lands
39
Other studies have also correlated higher rates of forest clearance with tenure insecurity (Bohn and
Deacon, 2000, Southgate et al., 1991, Alston et al., 2000, all cited by Godoy et al., 2001)
40
Some Indigenous Peoples prefer to use the term “relationship with the mother earth and land ” instead of
the term “access to and ownership of land”.

42

(UNPFII, 2005a, Verma, 2007). “The destruction of the pastoralist economy around which their
identities and cultures as indigenous peoples revolve is taking place with the full complicity of the
State and the market” (UNPFII, 2005a). The very damaging effects of land alienation are also
illustrated by the Chixoy Dam Legacy Study in Guatemala (Box 4) which examined the impact of
the development of a mine on the local indigenous population. The study showed that
development that disrupts culture by severing the connection to the land and traditional food
systems can result in dire consequences for well-being, measured in terms of altered livelihood
strategies and health.
Box 4 The Chixoy Dam Legacy Study
The Chixoy Dam legacy study (Johnston, 2005) provides a stark contrast between before and after
“development” and displacement of Indigenous Peoples in Guatemala. Before the mine, for the people
living in the Chixoy River Basin land rights were secure, and communal rights in many cases dated back to
the 1800s. Communities lived in the same region where their ancestors lived. Fertile river basin lands
provided a biannual harvest, fish was plentiful and available year round, and common property lands
supported livestock and harvesting of palms and other resources as saleable goods. Ancient trade routes
connected the area to the highlands. The socio-cultural fabric of life was tightly woven across a landscape
maintained by trade, familial ties, cultural beliefs, and historical relationships. Today, after the
establishment of the mine, life’s essentials can only be acquired with money, for water, power, firewood,
commercial fertilizer, household food, clothing, school fees and supplies, land taxes, roofing and other
materials to repair crumbling homes and community halls. Money is needed to travel to distant farmlands.
Money is needed to pay for the time and assistance of lawyers and others who help prepare claims to secure
long-promised compensation and other entitlements. And, people now lack access to the critical resources
that once supported household and community income generation. Extreme poverty has contributed to
malnutrition, causing many deaths in the first years of resettlement; health conditions are unstable as many
people are unable to access traditional remedies and have no money to buy imported medicine. This case
demonstrates how a close relationship to land and resources through secure tenure contribute to well-being.
When that relationship is severed, and the land no longer provides a means of subsistence, when the market
economy dictates livelihood strategies and there is restricted access to resources, well-being is severely
reduced.

The industrial pollution caused by mining and oil and gas exploration and exploitation can also
have very damaging effects on the lands and waterways still maintained and used by Indigenous
Peoples, killing fish and animals, polluting drinking water, destroying crops and wild plants and
undermining biodiversity. Plantations near their lands can also wreak considerable environmental
damage on their crops and wild foods through the heavy use of agro-chemicals that permeate the
air, soils and aquifers.
(c) Self-determination and land management/conservation
The legal recognition of rights to land and resources plays a key role in Indigenous Peoples’
efforts to achieve self-determination (IWGIA,1994) and to ensure their effective stewardship of
their habitats.
Conservation through self-determination is an integrated social ecology/self-determination
approach (Elford, 2002, Borrini-Feyerabend et al., 2004) and is recognized in Article 29 of the
UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. This approach proposes that the
conservation of Indigenous Peoples and their homelands must be under Indigenous Peoples’
control, or based on co-management principles. While this is often managed through the
establishment of protected reserves or reservations for Indigenous Peoples, the results are not
always satisfactory. Evidence from 324 biosphere reserves in 82 administrative regions/states in
Central America indicated that the main problem faced by the reserves was one of proper

43

management (Batisse, 1993, cited by Elford, 2002) as well as problems associated with buffer
zones and lack of local participation (Ishwaran, 1990, cited by Elford, 2002). While reserves
provide territorial security, Indigenous Peoples within their borders do not necessarily receive
legal title to their lands and resources and are only rarely invited to participate in co-stewardship
management arrangements. All too often, they have been passive beneficiaries in externallymanaged project activities. Evidence from Central America clearly illustrates that Indigenous
Nations cannot achieve conservation by self-determination without a conducive local, national
and international environment (see Box 5).
Box 5 Self determination and Conservation in Panama and Nicaragua
The Kuna Yala territory in Panama (Elford, 2002) is inhabited by the Kuna nation, some 30,000 people
who retain an intimate relationship with the environment, and identify their culture with an expanse of land.
Their oral history and culture support a livelihood that is in balance with nature. Despite a history of
conflict (Spanish in the 16th century, expropriation of land in the early 1900s) they have managed to retain
their traditional democratic political system. Although they have interacted with non-indigenous
economies since the 16th century, they have retained extensive ecological knowledge and resource
management practices. They have also maintained an intimate, mutually dependent relationship with the
environment because they have retained control of their subsistence systems and ecosystems, adapting their
social and cultural systems and their subsistence economies to incorporate market-oriented, cash-based
activities (exhibiting resilience). Elford compares the Kuna with the Miskito in Nicaragua, who have
parallel experiences, but the Miskito have been largely unsuccessful in implementing conservation
practices because of lack of control of conservation initiatives in their homeland. Key here is the
recommendation that it is advantageous for “nations to be socially and culturally cohesive; to have legally
recognized rights to control their land and resources; to be able to organize politically, to have an
understanding of, and ability to interact with, external political, economic and education systems; and to
have access to external financial and political support.”

In 2002 the World Commission on Dams carried out an independent global review of the
development effectiveness of large dams with specific reference to the situation of Indigenous
Peoples. The review highlights the disproportionately negative impacts that Indigenous Peoples
suffer from dam construction programmes if their right to self-determination is not fully
recognized and they continue to be marginalized in the related decision-making processes
(Earthscan, 2000, cited by Tebtebba Foundation, 2002).
There is a need for action by national governments to help communities protect their tenure
systems from illegal encroachment. In Costa Rica, for instance, 49 percent of the land in the
indigenous reserves is occupied by illegal settlers (Colchester et al., 2004). Indigenous lands are
also threatened in Brazil, where the indigenous Ka’apor have sought support for training guards
to protect the borders of the Reserva Indígena Alto Turiaçu (Balee, 2004). Other studies indicate
that the greatest source of land tenure insecurity is usurpation of land by government agencies for
development initiatives. In such cases, the regularization of land tenure rights through a land
registration programme provides much needed protection against these threats (Riddell, 2000).
There are nonetheless cases of positive government action. In the Philippines, for instance, the
1997 Indigenous People’s Rights Act explicitly recognizes the rights of Indigenous Peoples to
their ancestral lands, to self-determination and to the free exercise of their culture. Around 76,000
Indigenous Peoples (out of the total indigenous population of eight million) are direct
beneficiaries of Certificates of Ancestral Domain, which recognize their inherent right to selfgovernance and self-determination and respect the integrity of their values, practices and
institutions (UNDP, 2004). However, encroachment continues and these rights are not always
respected despite the enabling legislation. The Republic of Panama, which is a priority area for
biodiversity conservation (Condit et al., 2001), is home to seven different Indigenous Peoples

44

who enjoy legal recognition of their sovereignty by the State. Panama was the first country in
Latin America to recognize such rights for Indigenous populations and 22 percent of the national
territory is now designated as sovereign indigenous reserves.
Possible macro-level indicators include numbers of countries with national laws that protect
Indigenous Peoples’ self-determination, sovereignty and rights to ancestral lands, territories and
resources, as well as to management or co-management and conservation of their habitats. More
specific indicators that could be applied in individual countries include numbers of beneficiaries
(communities or individuals) from laws that recognize indigenous rights to lands and other
natural resources, and measures to estimate time-series data on food availability/consumption,
nutritional status, children’s morbidity and mortality rates etc. in order to assess the impacts of
different land regimes on food security and livelihoods.
(d) Land rights and gender
In most indigenous societies, women and men have distinct ritual, social and economic
responsibilities (UNPFII, 2004, Verma, 2007). Under the prevailing traditional common property
regimes, women have access to land for crops and other livelihood activities for which they are
responsible. In some areas matrilineal inheritance is still common. The division of labour in rural
areas varies according to the type of ecology and livelihood system (forest, coastal or inland
waterways, drylands/pastures, humid tropics, temperate rainfed, Arctic/Antarctic), and ethnicity
and culture. Women often have the main responsibility for cultivating subsistence food crops (as
well as collecting firewood, fetching water and handling domestic and child care tasks) while men
go hunting and fishing. However, in some cultures, women also go hunting and fishing, and men
engage in agriculture. Thus, it is vital that these gender-specific roles and associated rights and
opportunities are taken into account in the design of polices and programmes that affect
Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems and livelihoods.
However, many development interventions have not dealt fairly with indigenous women. In
addition, men have tended to be the first to seize new opportunities offered by changing market
forces. Women’s rights of access and security of tenure are often eroded during agricultural
transformation and social change processes. For example, male preferences for cash crops over
food crops is leading to increasing areas of the best land under male-controlled cash crops and the
progressive marginalization of women farmers. In other cases, women's access to land has been
undermined by the increase in purchase of legal titles by men. Although reliable data from
Indigenous Peoples is lacking, the trends in Jamaica and Liberia may be a proxy for the situation
of many Indigenous Peoples. In Jamaica, for example, 56 percent of farms were owned by men in
1954 compared with 76 percent in 1961. Land settlement schemes also often grant titles or access
rights to male household heads, who were assumed to be responsible for family sustenance,
ignoring the fact that in many parts of the world women farmers are largely responsible for food
production and security (du Guerny, 1999). A study in Liberia showed that the key to post-war
reconstruction is the rebuilding of the country’s traditional agriculture sector, which has suffered
huge losses in agro-biodiversity. In one of the many villages studied, women had maintained
more than 112 rice varieties, matching the seed type with such factors as the degree of slope,
amount of insulation, soil type. If traditional seed stocks, which are the products of centuries of
deliberate breeding and selection by women, are lost, many of Liberia’s indigenous rice cultures
will disappear and agricultural productivity is likely to fall by about 50 percent (Thomasson,
1991).

45

The introduction of individualized land holdings in indigenous areas, forced resettlement,
compensation, registration of household heads for taxation or benefit-sharing purposes, and the
availability of jobs in extractive industries have all tended to favour males over females. The
result has been a marked erosion of indigenous women’s rights and resulting poverty and loss of
status (Griffen, 2001 and others cited by Colchester et al., 2004). This concern was reflected in
the Declaration of the 2006 International Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development (ICARRD) which underlines the need to ensure sustainable and equitable access to
and control over land and related resources in a manner that fully respects the rights and
aspirations of rural people, women and vulnerable groups (ICARRD, 2006).
Indicators are needed to measure the impacts of change on indigenous women’s security of tenure
and the inter-related changes in women’s decision-making capacity at the household, community
or project level (see Appendix table 1). The indicators developed at the 2nd Global Consultation
attempt to capture the extent of legal recognition and protection of indigenous women’s rights to
continued use of traditional lands, territories and resources for traditional food production and
associated ceremonial uses (Appendix table 2).
5.1.2 Integrity of and access to sacred sites for ceremonial purposes related to use of traditional
foods (Indicator area 6 in the set of 11 indicator areas)
Indigenous Peoples’ access to sacred sites in their traditional territories is important for the
continuation of their cultural practices. Sacred forest groves are preserved and maintained through
culturally-based traditional management practices that protect certain species and habitats and
mitigate environmental disturbances such as floods, droughts, and fires, by providing refugia for
species from which they can re-colonize their habitats (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment,
2005). A range of traditions and values are embodied in sacred groves, forests and water bodies.
For instance, these sites are often believed to be the homes of spirits and so access is usually
restricted by taboos and customs. Sacred or fetish groves play a significant role in forest
protection in Ghana (Amoako-Atta, 1998). Home to spiritual forces and centres of territorial cults
inherited from past generations, these forested areas can be seen as social creations that
encapsulate centuries of historical events and still operate as places of memory and conserve local
biodiversity (Chouin, 2002). However, in the Western Ghats of Karnataka and parts of central
India, traditions of maintaining ancient sacred groves like the Nagabanas and Bhoothastanas are
being eroded, leading to the loss of biodiversity (Gadgil and Gokhale, 2005).
The Akwé: Kon Voluntary Guidelines (CBD, 2004) recognize the importance of considering the
role of sacred sites in impact assessments and some researchers have suggested the existence and
use of sacred sites by local communities, governments, development agencies and industrial
enterprises as an indicator of the continuation of sacred groves (Laaksonen et al., 2005) (see
Appendix table 1). Other suggested indicators measure changes in the level of activity in sacred
sites, and changes in the types and abundance of different species. The indicators developed at the
2nd Global Consultation (Appendix table 2) also stress the recognition and protection of sacred
sites as well as comparisons of past and present use of sacred sites within traditional territories.
5.2 Abundance, scarcity and/or threats to traditional seeds, plant medicines and food
animals as well as cultural practices associated with their protection and survival (Indicator
area 2 in the set of 11 indicator areas)

46

This indicator area is associated with measures of the drivers41 of change in traditional food and
medicinal resources. Well established relationships between biodiversity and food systems
(Kuhnlein et al., 2006, Thrupp, 2000), suggest that indicators which measure changes in the
biodiversity of Indigenous Peoples’ ecosystems can serve as proxy measures of changes in their
traditional foods and medicines. At the global level, the main drivers of biodiversity loss in
terrestrial systems are land use changes and changes in climate. In marine systems overexploitation is the main driver. Globalization processes without clear rules and instruments to
protect rights of ownership, access to and use of biodiversity are also major causes of biodiversity
loss contributing to the deepening of poverty levels in many developing countries (Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment, 2005).
Cultural diversity is being rapidly lost, in parallel to biological diversity, largely as a result of
these same drivers (Maffi, 2001, Harmon, 2002, Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005).
Indigenous Peoples’ cultures are being disrupted in part due to their close dependence on food
resources that are disappearing or being degraded. Empirical evidence suggests that processes of
acculturation can result in the loss of this important traditional ecological knowledge (Benz et al.,
2000, Zent, 2001). Since the use of both domesticated crops and wild food plants is shaped by
culture and associated knowledge, the preservation of cultural systems is as important as the
conservation of the associated biological resources (King and Eyzaguirre, 1999). Recognition of
the links between culture and biological diversity can, moreover, lead to protection or even
enhancement of these food resources (Kuhnlein et al., 2006). For example, the culturally-based
forest management system of the Ka’apor in Brazil (Balee, 1993), ensures greater environmental
diversity than that found in ‘pristine’ conditions, where there is no human presence (BorriniFeyerabend et al., 2004).
Threats to Indigenous Peoples’ habitats and associated food and medicinal sources are numerous,
occur at multiple scales, and include resource extraction activities, population growth,
marginalization of peoples, the spread of invasive species, loss of knowledge of biodiversity,
cultural value changes, and use of introduced species. Some possible sub-categories for indicator
development to help distinguish between these factors are: i) the type and distribution of
traditional ecological and agro-ecological knowledge and the status of local biodiversity and
agro-biodiversity; ii) the use of introduced seeds including genetically modified seeds; iii) habitat
loss through land conversion (for mining, oil exploration, logging, grazing and plantations); iv)
habitat degradation through contamination from industrial waste or agro-chemicals; and v) market
expansion.
5.2.1 Traditional knowledge of biodiversity and agro-biodiversity
The protection and sustainable management of biodiversity represent an integral part of risk
avoidance mechanisms in local communities and indigenous societies (Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment, 2005). Most traditional food systems of Indigenous Peoples contain at least 70-100
species of traditional food plants (Kuhnlein et al., 2006). Development does not necessarily erode
traditional ecological knowledge (TEK). Zarger and Stepp (2004) found no change in ethnobotanical knowledge among children in Chiapas, Mexico, despite significant socioeconomic
changes. Many societies show resistance to change or are able to successfully incorporate marketoriented production within their traditional resource management system (Borrini-Feyerabend et
al., 2004). However, lack of reliable baseline measures makes it difficult to estimate changes in
41

A driver is any natural or human-induced factor or process that directly or indirectly causes a
change in an ecosystem (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005)

47

traditional ecological knowledge (Zerner, 2000, Godoy et al,. 2005) and how processes of change
in knowledge systems affect their interaction with the local environment. Differences in methods
of data collection also make it difficult to compare research results and draw generalizations
about what causes variations in local traditional ecological knowledge. Reyes-Garcia et al. (2006)
recommend developing a reliable compound measure of the different components of TEK that
can be used for cross-cultural comparisons.
As yet, no trend data are available on traditional ecological and agro-ecological knowledge
(TEAK). However, indicators of traditional knowledge are currently being developed by the
Secretariat of the Convention on Biodiversity (CBD), the UNEP-World Conservation Monitoring
Centre, in collaboration with UNESCO, and by the international NGO, Terralingua. These42 focus
on areas of supportive policies and programmes, including education systems for the use of
TEAK, numbers of Indigenous Peoples involved in traditional and non-traditional economic
activities, and knowledge of different species and transmission of that knowledge as well as the
status and trends of linguistic diversity and numbers of speakers of indigenous languages. These
indicators are also designed to measure the impact of the drivers of change.
5.2.2. Loss of biodiversity through the use of introduced and genetically modified seeds
The active management of genetic diversity in agricultural systems is a conservative strategy
employed by subsistence farmers to ensure their food supplies under variable conditions. The
genetic traits of many local varieties include resistance to drought and pests, tolerance to such
conditions as salinity, yield improvement characteristics, nutritional quality, processing and
storage attributes, and medicinal properties. The loss of plant (and animal) genetic diversity
reduces opportunities to select for desirable traits both now, and in the future.
The UN system is making considerable efforts to protect the genetic diversity of traditional crops.
The International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGR) promotes
and supports farmers’ and communities’ efforts to manage and conserve their plant genetic
resources for food and agriculture. The CBD’s Global Plan of Action emphasizes the need for
improved management and conservation of biodiversity. Nonetheless, a major issue for
Indigenous Peoples and for many farmers in general, is the use of genetically modified (GM)
seeds that either displace or could potentially hybridize with traditional varieties, sometimes
forcing farmers to buy new seeds every year.
Genetic Use Restriction Technologies (GURTs), colloquially known as ‘terminator seeds’,43
could someday undermine or destroy the livelihoods of many farmers. For Indigenous Peoples,
these seeds represent an unequal relationship between farmers and those who own the right to
produce the seeds. The Subsidiary Body on Science, Technology and Technological Advice to
the Conference of the Parties of the CBD outlined potentially negative impacts of GURTs
(SBSTTA, 2003). These include: the possible displacement of local crop varieties, locallyadapted genetic material and wild relatives; the displacement of traditional farming systems and
the social, cultural and spiritual dimensions associated with these, including the storage, exchange
and cultural uses of seeds and seed-bearing plants; and limits on the rights and prerogatives of
indigenous and local communities with regard to traditional knowledge and community cultural
values. Currently, there are insufficient data on the impact of GURTs on agricultural biodiversity
and key ecosystem functions. It is clear that more research is needed on the impact of these
technologies and, in the meantime, the precautionary principle should apply.
42
43

All indicators and their sources mentioned in this section are listed in Appendix table 1.
These seeds are not viable and are unable to reproduce themselves.

48

There are cases where Indigenous Peoples prefer the advantages conferred by higher yielding
commercial crop varieties including genetically modified crops if they provide higher economic
returns, and insect and drought resistance. However, as evidenced in the Indian state of Kerala,
the adoption of high yielding varieties has resulted in the loss of traditional rice varieties although
local people agree that these cultivars have superior flavour and taste (Gadgil and Gokhale,
2005). Work with hillside maize farmers in Central America has shown that hybrids do not offer
higher rates of return on investment than traditional open pollinated varieties. Government
programmes often subsidize or distribute high yielding commercial seed, including hybrids, rather
than local varieties. Yet Indigenous Peoples and other farmers often claim that these do not
perform as well under local conditions as their own seed. Furthermore, when an integrated
systems approach is applied, the advantages usually lie with the traditional varieties. Moreover, if
the advantages are marginal, farmers usually opt for traditional varieties because they taste better,
are easier to cook and are more adapted to local conditions. (I. Cherrett, personal communication,
22 August 2006).
Indicators are suggested (see Appendix table 1) that compare the level of use of introduced seeds
with the use of traditional varieties and compare measures of the yield, consumption, price and
preference of traditional crops with those same measures of introduced or GM crops. These
measures would indicate the extent of shift from local/traditional to introduced varieties. Further
research is needed on the implications for food security.
5.2.3 Habitat loss through land conversion (i.e. monocultures) and environmental degradation
The extent of habitat loss and ecosystem degradation is a measure of the threats to traditional
seeds, plant medicines and food animals since local ecosystem integrity is essential for the
maintenance of traditional food systems. The Convention on Biodiversity (CBD) recognizes that
traditional and direct dependence on renewable resources and ecosystems, including sustainable
harvesting, continues to be essential to the cultural, economic and physical well-being of
Indigenous Peoples and their communities. Similarly, the Akwé: Kon Voluntary Guidelines
(CBD 2004) state that:
“Most indigenous and local communities live in areas where the vast majority of the
world's genetic resources are found. They have used biological diversity in a
sustainable way for thousands of years and their cultures and knowledge are deeply
rooted in the environment on which they depend. As a result, developments proposed
to take place on lands and waters traditionally occupied by Indigenous and local
communities have been a source of concern to these communities because of the
potential long-term negative impacts on their livelihoods and traditional knowledge”.
In particular, forest ecosystems play a significant role in supplementing staple foods and offering
insurance against malnutrition or famine, particularly during seasonal food shortages or
emergencies such as droughts, floods or wars (Vicente et al., in press, 2008). They also provide a
valuable source of forage as evidenced by a recent study in Mexico that found 18 different forage
species in a tropical forest (Dalle 2006, cited by Vicente et al., in press 2008). The destruction of
forest cover, wetlands and other uncultivated areas for pastures or cultivation can also lead to a
decline in agricultural biodiversity through the loss of ‘wild’ relatives of crop plants, birds, fish
and livestock breeds. Cash cropping systems based on monocultures have displaced subsistence
agriculture and the associated customary knowledge and practices. Monocultures may increase
economic productivity for large farmers but may prove inefficient in the long term with pest

49

infestation or as environmental conditions fluctuate. This is where time-tested traditional crops
may in some cases be the most suitable for local ecological conditions.
Suggested indicators (Appendix table 1) to capture the extent of shift from subsistence to
commercial agriculture and monocultures and the related impacts on crop genetic diversity focus
on changes in the local flora and fauna. Other indicators measure the extent of threats to resources
and habitat (such as land conversion, climate change, contaminant levels) and the type of
protection mechanisms in place, including the extent of Indigenous Peoples’ inclusion,
participation and employment in ecosystem management.
5.2.4 Market expansion
Assessing the social, economic, cultural and environmental effects of markets on Indigenous
Peoples’ natural resource conservation and management practices is important for identifying
policies and programmes to improve their well-being while protecting the sustainability of their
resource base (Godoy et al., 2005). People who participate in markets usually acquire new
language skills, attitudes, and values (Lane, 1991, Bowles, 1998, Lazear, 1999, all cited by
Godoy et al., 2005). This sometimes leads to a process of acculturation which can negatively
affect traditional ecological and agro-ecological knowledge, undermining traditional food and
agro-ecological systems.
The Indigenous Peoples' Seattle Declaration (1999) and Via Campesina 44 state that the WTO
Agreement on Agriculture (AOA), which promotes export competition and import liberalization,
has allowed the entry of cheap agricultural imports into indigenous communities, undermining
local production and their associated integrated and ecologically balanced agricultural practices.
In order to measure the impact of market expansion on the availability and use of traditional
seeds, medicinal plants and food animals, proposed indicators (refer to Appendix table 1) focus
on the number of Indigenous Peoples who participate in non-traditional economic activities
compared with those who practice traditional subsistence activities. Measures of Indigenous
Peoples’ access to markets to sell local products and the prevalence of traditional exchange and
reciprocity systems compared with cash payments for labour and other services are also indicative
of the extent of engagement in the global or regional market economy.
Indicators developed at the 2nd Global Consultation include baseline measures of the availability
and condition of these traditional food resources and measures of impacts of policies and
programmes to restore or protect these resources.
5.3 Use and transmission of methods, knowledge, language, ceremonies, dances, prayers,
oral histories, stories and songs related to traditional foods and subsistence practices, and
the continued use of traditional foods in daily diet as well as in relevant cultural/ceremonial
practices
5.3.1 Consumption and preparation of traditional plant and animal foods and medicines,
including in ceremonial/ cultural use as well as daily household use (Indicator area 3 in the set
of 11 indicator areas)

44

Via Campesina
(http://www.viacampesina.org/main_en/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=180&Itemid=27)

50

Almost three quarters (72 percent) of the respondents to the IITC questionnaire stated that their
communities have initiated activities to strengthen, protect and/or restore their traditional
subsistence foods and practices. Almost all (96 percent) of the respondents considered it very
important for their community to keep cultivating, hunting, fishing, gathering, herding and eating
their traditional foods in order to maintain an active and healthy life. Respondents also expressed
concern about food aid donations of imported, canned and surplus foods, as well as genetically
modified foods they perceive as harmful to their health.
The continued use of traditional cultural practices has been linked to well-being and community
wellness in ethnographic studies (Adelson, 1998) but there are few epidemiological data that
confirm this (Chandler and Lalonde, 1998). Several publications45 confirm that traditional food
systems can enhance Indigenous Peoples’ quality of life, including their nutritional and health
status and cultural expression (Kuhnlein, 2005, Salehi et al., 2005, Johns, 2004, Receveur and
Kuhnlein, 1998, and Receveur et al., 1997). Culture plays a key role in ensuring adequate
nutrition, since the appropriateness of foodstuffs, food taboos and food distribution are culturally
determined (Villarreal, 2000). Disruptions to traditional subsistence activities can restrict
Indigenous Peoples’ capacity to protect their nutrition and health (Lawrence et al., 1980, Wirsing,
1985, Coimbra et al., 2002, all cited by Godoy et al., 2005). Development processes often lead to
dietary changes that result in increased chronic conditions such as obesity and diabetes. Such
consequences could be reduced with more attention to the principles of diet and health that are
already contained within the culture, and with recognition of the nutrient properties of traditional
food resources (Kuhnlein et al., 2006). Environmental degradation resulting, for example, from
industrial mining, toxic by-product storage and agro-chemicals that contaminate water and other
natural resources, also adversely affects the health of Indigenous Peoples (Stephens et al., 2006).
A study that measured the level of psychological distress against different socio-cultural factors,
such as participation in traditional activities, was conducted with the James Bay Cree in Quebec,
Canada (Kirmayer et al., 2000). Based on 833 interviews, the researchers found that higher scores
on the indicators of i) age, ii) having a good relationship with the community and iii) the number
of weeks spent in the bush, were associated with significantly less distress. The number of weeks
spent in the bush in the past year was particularly important, most likely because bush life
involves contact with nature, spiritual relations with animals, consumption of valued foods and
participation in other traditional activities. Increased time in the bush may also confer ‘mental
health benefits by increasing family solidarity and social support, reinforcing cultural identity,
improving physical health with nutritious bush foods and exercise, or providing respite from the
pressures of settlement life.’ (Kirmayer et al., 2000). Studies of cosmological belief systems in
Amazonia have also emphasized the deep material, social, moral, spiritual, and ceremonial
connections between humans and natural biota (Descola, 1996; Arhem, 1996; Viveiros de Castro,
1998; Cayón, 2002; Rival, 2002; Cormier, 2003, all cited by Zent and Zent (in press)).
A caveat, however, is that the export of traditional food, such as bush meat, for Indigenous
Peoples living in urban areas may create more pressure on already endangered species (African
Environmental Outlook 1, 2004). In many African countries where bush meat is important to
local peoples’ traditional food systems and food security (Mainka and Trividi, 2002), the impact
on some species, such as primates, is severe and local action to alleviate these pressures may be
required even at the cost of certain cultural traditions. There is concern also in Suriname where
high demand for bush meat by indigenous employees in the Bakhuys Bauxite Mine Project could

45

For example, research by Kuhnlein and others at the Centre for Indigenous Nutrition and Environment
(CINE) at McGill University in Montreal, Canada.

51

encourage over-hunting in the neighbouring area and local depletion of endangered species such
as the tapir (Goodland, 2006).
Suggested indicators to measure changes in the use of traditional foods and medicines include
measures of changes in the production and consumption of staple foods (crops, wild animal and
plant species) and medicines, and their nutritional and health impacts. Indicators developed at the
2nd Global Consultation (Appendix table 2), which were similar to those proposed by IFAD
(Appendix table 1), also attempt to capture the extent and impact of participation in programmes
that aim to reinforce the value of traditional foods and associated cultural practices.
5.3.2 Continued practice and use of ceremonies, dances, prayers, songs and stories and other
cultural traditions related to the use of traditional foods and subsistence practices (Indicator
area 4 in the set of 11 indicator areas)
Most of the IITC survey respondents stated that traditional subsistence foods and practices were
very important for maintaining their community’s culture. The Declaration of Atitlán46
emphasizes the cultural value of Indigenous Peoples’ agricultural and food systems and, in turn,
the importance of indigenous cultures and ceremonial practices to sustainable agriculture and
food systems.
Ceremonies, oral traditions such as stories, songs and oral histories and other cultural practices
such as reciprocity, are important cultural elements in the maintenance and transmission of
knowledge and practices of traditional food and agro-ecosystems. The loss of these cultural
practices creates a disconnect in the relationship between culture and traditional food systems.
However, the impacts of development processes on these culture-food relationships are mixed.
For instance, the West Kitikmeot/Slave Study in the North West Territories, Canada, assessed the
impact of diamond mining on the indigenous communities using a set of 20 community-derived
indicators to measure participation in cultural activities, such as participation in the Lutselk'e
Spiritual Gathering, the use of Dene songs and traditional skills in butchering and preparing
caribou and training the youth in land-based skills. Mining activities, despite their negative
impact on the environment, had little impact on cultural activities. While some 65 percent of
people interviewed were "very concerned" about the potential long-term environmental effects of
the mines, they reported that there had been no effect on the spiritual values associated with the
site, land use activities (hunting and trapping), traditional knowledge of drumming and songs or
traditional skills in hunting and butchering caribou (Parlee and Marlowe, 2000). However, other
evidence suggests that mining and the extraction of oil and gas in indigenous territories rarely
benefit the Indigenous Peoples (UNPFII, 2005a). Thus, the benefits to Indigenous Peoples of
mining, as with other development activities, appear to be mixed. Even in cases where there are
clear economic benefits and neutral cultural impacts, the environmental issues need careful
attention.
Research conducted with subsistence farmers in the hills of Nepal (Pant, unpublished data) shows
that traditional uses of local crop varieties in festivals and lifecycle ceremonies can help maintain
agricultural biodiversity. Specific crop varieties are preferred in major celebrations, such as
Selroti, a ring shaped bread prepared from Gurdi and Madishe landraces of rice and are essential
in major festivals, such as Dashain and Tihar, and important life cycle celebrations such as
Bartabandha and Bibaha. Bread prepared from other rice varieties would not be as good or might
be regarded as religiously impure. As long as these traditional beliefs and ritual practices are
46

Adopted at the 1st Indigenous Peoples’ Global Consultation on the Right to Food in 2002.

52

valued in the socio-cultural system, those landraces and the biodiversity they represent are likely
to be preserved.
Researchers have debated whether markets worsen the well-being of Indigenous Peoples by
eroding their traditional social structure and cultural traditions, such as traditional practices of
sharing. Participation in market transactions has been found to threaten traditional reciprocal
exchange systems which ensure sharing of food in times of shortage, and the group cooperation
these systems foster. These practices were found to have changed among Indigenous Peoples in
Peru, who shared purchased goods less than goods produced at home (Putsche, 2000). However,
in both the Sierra and the Selva of Peru, inter- and intra-ethnic exchanges have always focused on
imported (manufactured) goods (P. Warren, personal communication, 2006).
Indicators that measure the extent of the relationship between ceremonies and oral traditions and
traditional foods and subsistence practices have been proposed by several different agencies and
researchers (see Appendix table 1). These include measures of the extent of participation in and
knowledge of traditional spiritual ceremonies related to food and associated freedom of belief,
thought and expression. The continued use of totems related to food as well as the number of
religious ceremonies and festivals connected with subsistence practices or use foods in the
ceremonies are also possible indicators. The indicators shown in Appendix table 2, developed at
the 2nd Global Consultation, show the important role of institutions and ceremonies in
transmitting cultural practices associated with traditional food production systems.
5.3.3 Preservation and continued use of language and traditional names for foods and
processes (planting, hunting, gathering, harvesting, fishing, food preparation etc.) (Indicator
area 5 in the set of 11 indicator areas)
Cultural concepts are expressed in and through language – and language reflects the history,
modes of thought, and institutions of a culture. Knowing a language provides a strong sense of
cultural identity and a sense of wellness (Parsons Yazzie cited by Reyhener, 2001). “Language is
our unique relationship to the Creator, our attitudes, beliefs, values and fundamental notions of
what is truth. Our Languages are the cornerstone of who we are as a People. Without our
Languages our cultures cannot survive.” (Assembly of First Nations, 1990).
“In the same way that a healthy planet requires biological diversity, a healthy cultural world
requires linguistic diversity. Yet, language is also an elaborate phenomenon tied to real people
and cultures. Language loss threatens a fundamental human right—that of expression of the life
and life ways of a people. Each language relates ideas that can be expressed in that language and
no other. Thus, when an indigenous community is no longer allowed to pray, sing, or tell stories
in its language, it is denied a fundamental human right. Unfortunately, linguistic rights have been
seriously abused for hundreds of years by banning specific languages and indirectly by assaulting
language-support structures such as land, economies and religions. …Languages today are the
next frontier in setting the country into moral and environmental symmetry” (Quotation from
Wilhelm Meya, Director of the Lakota Language Consortium).
Linguistic and cultural diversity have been threatened by processes of globalization, such as
acculturation, market expansion, and biodiversity loss as well as through education and
assimilation policies and programmes. Current statistics indicate that of the estimated 10,000
languages that have ever existed, only about 6,000 are spoken today, and the number is projected
to drop by 50 to 90 percent over the next 100 years. In Australia, some 500 languages have been
lost since the arrival of Europeans (UNDP, 2004). The loss of indigenous languages can have a
dramatic effect on Indigenous Peoples’ ability to maintain their traditional knowledge and food

53

systems. In Mexico, for example, knowledge of plant uses dropped as skills in Spanish increased
(Benz et al., 2000). Similarly, knowledge of forest trees declined among 104 Amerindians in
Venezuela with an increase in formal schooling or fluency in spoken Spanish (Zent, 2001).
Another study found that only 13 percent of children receiving primary education in sub-Saharan
Africa were taught in their mother tongue despite the well-known negative implications for the
children’s development (UNDP, 2004).
The World Rainforest Movement Charter of the Indigenous-Tribal Peoples of the Tropical
Forests (1992) calls for the establishment of bilingual and intercultural educational systems that
“revalidate our beliefs, religious traditions, customs, and knowledge; allowing our control over
these programmes, by the provision of suitable training, in accordance with our cultures; in order
to achieve technical and scientific advances for our peoples, in tune with our own cosmovisions,
and as a contribution to the world community.”
The loss of those aspects of language associated with food and agro-ecological systems has been
considered a proxy indicator of the loss of knowledge associated with agro-biodiversity (CBD,
2006). The relationship works the other way as well: with the loss of agro-biodiversity and
biodiversity comes the loss of associated language terms.
There are several data sources on the numbers of speakers of indigenous languages, such as the
Solidarity Foundation’s compilation of census data on populations of indigenous tribes in North
America going back to 1900; and other published sources, such as the two editions of Les
Langues du Monde by Meillet and Cohen (Harmon et al., 2006), as well as UNESCO’s indicator
of cultural practices and heritage: leading languages (Table 6 in UNESCO, 2000). The NGO
Terralingua47 has been gathering trend data on numbers of mother-tongue speakers from a
geographically and culturally representative sample of the world’s languages, with a focus on
indigenous languages48 (Harmon et al., 2005). A global indicator on the status and trends in
linguistic diversity and numbers of speakers of indigenous languages is one of 12 headline
indicators selected by the CBD at the 7th Conference of the Parties in February 2004, to measure
progress towards its 2010 targets for halting the loss of biodiversity.
While efforts are underway to measure the status of indigenous languages, other indicators have
been proposed to measure the extent of use of indigenous languages in the media and education
systems. Also indicators are proposed that measure the extent to which an indigenous language is
used for naming species and ecosystem features and the extent to which indigenous language
forms the basis of songs and stories (refer to Appendix table 1). Other indicators, developed at the
2nd Global Consultation (Appendix table 2) are also designed to measure the level of engagement
by community members in maintaining language(s) and cultural practices associated with
traditional food systems.
5.3.4 Existence and viability of mechanisms and institutions created by and accessible to
Indigenous Peoples for transmission of food related traditional knowledge and practices to
future generations (Indicator area 9 in the set of 11 indicator areas)
47

Terralingua’s Index of Biocultural Diversity (IBCD) (Loh and Harmon, 2005) is a measure of
biocultural diversity. Covering most countries, it is based on measures of ethno-linguistic and biological
diversity and compares countries in terms of their diversity value. It is, however, a static index and does
not contain time-series data.
48
The proposed indigenous languages index (Harmon et al., 2005) will measure average trends over time in
the numbers of speakers of a large number of indigenous languages, to form an index of cultural diversity.

54

The purpose of this proposed indicator area is to monitor the effectiveness of community-level
indigenous institutions in engaging in decision-making processes that affect traditional food and
agro-ecosystems and food security. Both formal and informal institutions are important, the latter
including story telling and interactions between the elders and youth which enable the intergenerational transmission of knowledge, practices and beliefs associated with sustainable food
and agro-ecosystems.
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment conducted a meta-assessment of several communitybased studies that assessed the links between ecosystem services and human well-being, taking
account of multiple knowledge systems, including traditional knowledge. Local institutions were
found to be important in conferring authority on knowledge-holders, so that local-level
knowledge is used at higher decision-making levels on matters that affect indigenous
communities (Ericksen and Woodley et al., 2005). Legal recognition of local-level institutions
can reinforce their influence at higher scales (Uphoff, 1986).
Globalization often entails a periodic substitution of culture and cultural knowledge by
mainstream knowledge and formal institutions; however, endogenous institutions provide the
backbone for the survival of socio-cultural norms and practices (Kurien, 2001). Such institutions
play an important role in ensuring the continuity of traditional food systems and agro-ecosystems
through the transmission of related traditional knowledge, beliefs and practices across
generations, while taking into account the fact that culture is dynamic and changing. Depending
on the gender division of labour, traditionally indigenous children and youth worked alongside
their parents, learning by doing. These traditions are often being weakened as young people go to
school, or have aspirations to migrate to urban areas. Other customary mechanisms include seed
exchanges among and between generations, reciprocal labour exchange among families, the use
of ritual foods in ceremonies and festivals, storytelling and cooking apprenticeship. In this
context, it is critical to identify factors that interfere with or provide opportunities for elders to
pass on their knowledge to the youth as well as to identify skills, traditional knowledge and
practices that are no longer appropriate to the changing environment (CBD Secretariat, 2004).
For Indigenous Peoples to engage effectively in political dialogue with national decision-makers,
there is a need for their political empowerment through their own representative or participatory
institutions which enable indigenous communities to articulate their specific interests and to
mobilize to influence decision-making processes (Craig and Tester, 1992, Utting, 1993, cited by
Elford, 2002, IWGIA, 1994, O’Faircheallaigh, 1999).
Indicators that are under consideration for this indicator area (see Appendix table 1) include
measures of the existence of traditional knowledge-holders, the persistence of customary law,
policies and programmes protecting traditional knowledge, the incorporation of traditional
knowledge in national school curricula, teaching in schools in indigenous languages and the level
of involvement of the youth and elders in community decision-making. Other proposed indicators
include the existence of laws regulating the activities of local-level institutions and the extent of
use of traditional ecological and agro-ecological knowledge in higher-level formal institutions.
Indicators developed at the 2nd Global Consultation include measures of laws and programmes
that support the roles of indigenous institutions in the transmission of local traditional knowledge,
identify the type and level of benefits enjoyed by different community groups from these
programmes (disaggregated by women, youth, men and age) and the use of modern
communication technologies (including radio, drama and songs) to disseminate traditional
knowledge (Appendix table 2).

55

5.4. Capacity by Indigenous Peoples for adaptability, resilience, and/or restoration of
traditional food use and production in response to changing conditions including migration,
displacement, urbanization and environmental changes
5.4.1 Migration and movement away from traditional lands as a result of rural-to-urban
migration, conflict, forced relocation, land appropriation, climate change, and economic
necessity; return patterns and relationships to continued use of traditional foods (Indicator
area 7 in the set of 11 indicator areas)
Rapidly increasing rural-urban migration provides a major challenge to Indigenous Peoples’
adaptive capacity in all regions of the world. In 1995, 44.8 percent of the world's population lived
in urban areas, with increases predicted to 50 percent in 2008 and 57.5 percent by 2025 (UN
2007, UNFPA, 2007). The reasons for migration are varied and include the pull factors of urban
amenities and employment and push factors such as conflict, forced relocation due to land
appropriation, ecological changes including climate change, and economic necessity. For
example, in many countries small-scale farm production is giving way to large-scale commercial
farming, which concentrates ancestral lands in the hands of a few agri-corporations and landlords,
triggering out-migration from indigenous communities to urban areas. Often joining the urban
homeless and jobless, the dislocation from their traditional social, economic and cultural support
systems means that many indigenous migrants live in distressful conditions (Indigenous Peoples'
Seattle Declaration, 1999).
The appropriation of Indigenous Peoples’ traditional lands and territories for mining, oil
extraction, logging or hydro-electric power generation is another major cause of migration. For
instance, after the Chixoy Dam was built (Johnston, 2005) (see Box 4) many indigenous families
were unable to produce sufficient food and income from locally-available resources, forcing
increasing numbers to leave home in search of work while those remaining were obliged to rely
upon remittances from an absent relative. Before the construction of the dam, 2 percent of
households reported a family member working in wage/labour jobs in the city and 54 percent
reported family members working for part of the year on distant farms, compared with the postdam situation with 29 percent reporting income from one or more adults working year-round in
the city and 43 percent reporting income from migrant work on distant farms, as a regular rather
than occasional income generation strategy. After the construction of the dam, the male
household head was gone for part or all of every year. This income generation strategy fractures
the family and the community with profound consequences for family and community social
dynamics and the reproduction of cultural norms and traditions.
Economic crises can also be powerful push factors. For instance, the consequences of economic
structural adjustments in the Dominican Republic have been rapid rural to urban migration, with
the rural population declining from 68 percent in 1960 to 35 percent in 1999 (FAO, 2000, cited by
Pomeroy and Jacob, 2004). Although the figures are not disaggregated by indigenous/nonindigenous population groups, it is likely that there has also been considerable out-migration from
indigenous communities. The traditional agrarian society with its close family ties and communal
bonds that revolve around natural cycles has been replaced by an urban setting, disconnected
from the environment, resulting in “anomie”, the sense of “normlessness”. Those who remain in
rural areas, who are more likely to be women and children, also find their lives and social
networks disrupted (Pomeroy and Jacob, 2004).
While limited data are available on the cultural impacts of rural-urban migration, research in
several African countries (Bryceson, 2000) indicates that rural-urban migration has profound and
far reaching consequences for social structures, cultural traditions and the division and

56

organization of labour that are grounded in local land use. The move to an urban environment
severs the migrants’ connection with their traditional ecosystem and its related culturally-based
knowledge and practices and results in serious acculturation.
Some proposed indicators of migration include measures of demographic shifts from traditional
territories to urban areas, household income and use of non-traditional, purchased foods, gender
ratios in households and the associated agricultural workloads for men and women, and the extent
of traditional ecological and agro-ecological knowledge of returnee migrant workers (see
Appendix table 1). Indicators from the 2nd Global Consultation include measures of the status of
implementation of laws and agreements relevant to indigenous migrants (Appendix table 2).
5.4.2. Capacity within Indigenous communities and Peoples for adaptability, resilience,
resistance and/or restoration of traditional food use and production in response to changing
economic, political and/ or environmental conditions (Indicator area 10 in the set of 11
indicator areas)
Resilience49 is the capacity or ability of peoples or communities to adapt to changing
circumstances such as expansion in the market economy, dramatic price fluctuations, new job
opportunities in urban areas, loss of traditional land or waterways to mineral or oil exploitation,
logging, plantations or national protected areas, changing political structures, schooling,
environmental degradation and pollution, and climate change. Some of these changes may be
long-term, providing ample time to adapt, while others may be sudden. The concept of resilience
can also include the evolution of cultural knowledge and practices that contribute to successful
adaptation strategies for all these different types of changes, including those that affect
indigenous food systems. As can be predicted from the conceptual framework on sustainable
livelihoods, indigenous communities’ capacity to adapt varies according to many factors,
including the type and severity of the change, threat or risk, their access to the five capitals, the
policy environment and the degree of organization and preparedness. The capacity for selforganization is key to ensuring resilience (Abel et al., 2006). Measures of resilience are important
indicators of how well individuals or communities accommodate to change.
The evidence is mixed on indigenous communities’ capacities to adapt their food and agroecological systems to changing environmental, social, political, economic and market conditions.
In north and northeast Thailand, for example, the sacred forest protection systems were
traditionally the most resilient form of common property regime. Around 1970, some
communities began to develop new local forest regimes to protect watershed forests and
communal woodland in response to growing shortages of water and forest products. Improved
local protection and management also permitted more intensive and sustainable use of these
resources (FAO, 1998). In West Kalimantan, Indonesia, indigenous and other communities
responded to a reduction in land area by incorporating or intensifying within their forest systems
the cultivation of tree crops with economic value such as rubber, rattan and durian (FAO, 1998).
While the livelihoods of Pygmies in Cameroon are traditionally assured through hunting,
gathering and fishing in the forests, agriculture is becoming increasingly important as part of their
strategy to survive as forest resources are depleted (Tchoumba, 2005).
However, in other indigenous communities traditional adaptation strategies have proved
ineffective to cope with change. Pastoralists in sub-Saharan Africa, for example, have well-tried
49

The capacity of a system to tolerate impacts of drivers or recover from impacts without irreversible
change in its outputs or structure.

57

mechanisms for surviving in erratic and risky environments. Their strategies include livestock
accumulation, herd movements following rainfall, breed and species diversification, and herd
dispersion between community members. Yet, these systems are proving vulnerable in the face of
a combination of factors that include periodic droughts and climate change impacts, economic
exclusion from markets, livestock epidemics, national and civil wars, re-drawing of territorial
boundaries, risks of conflict over increasingly scarce resources and changes in land tenure
policies and laws (Rass, 2006, Verma, 2007).
Some proposed indicators of resilience (see Appendix table 1) include the extent of local
knowledge about the relationship between changing ecological conditions and changes in
traditional foods and agro-ecological systems. The number of different food production and
procurement strategies adapted to changing ecological conditions and the degree of their
implementation in indigenous communities are also indicators. Indicators from the 2nd Global
Consultation include measures of efforts to re-establish traditional knowledge and practices and
adapt traditional food systems to changing environmental, market and social conditions
(Appendix table 2).
5.5 Ability of Indigenous Peoples to exercise and implement their rights including selfdetermination and free, prior and informed consent, as well as their self-government
structures, to promote and defend their Food Sovereignty and related aspects of their
development
5.5.1 Effective consultations for planning, implementation and evaluation applying the
principles of free, prior and informed consent and full participation by community members
when development programmes are implemented by states, outside agencies or other entities
and the extent to which cultural concerns are considered and addressed (Indicator area 8 in
the set of 11 indicator areas)
Indigenous Peoples’ organizations maintain that various types of development activities imposed
on indigenous communities have had negative impacts on their traditional food and agroecosystems. Such impacts can only be avoided if development programmes are carried out with
the free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) of the indigenous communities with traditional rights
to the lands, territories or resources concerned. The full and effective participation of the
concerned indigenous communities (including their traditional leadership and indigenous women)
should be assured in all phases of programme planning, implementation, evaluation and followup (IITC, 2004, IFAD, 2005). Yet, the IITC survey revealed that only 16 percent of the
development programmes implemented in the respondents’ communities enjoyed full community
involvement in their planning and implementation. Some communities did not receive any prior
information about the programmes, and others expressed concern that only collaborators or
profiteers were consulted.
Proposed indicators include the number of development programmes that involve collaborative or
co-management partnerships with participating communities (Appendix table 1). Other indicators
include measures of support for indigenous capacity, leadership, policy and programme
development by state and indigenous governance, including number of programmes and persons
participating in and completing trainings. Indicators developed at the 2nd Global Consultation
(Appendix table 2) include the level of participation by Indigenous Peoples in project planning
and implementation and the extent to which local food systems that are important for food
sovereignty have been maintained through self-determination mechanisms.

58

The issues related to this indicator area are closely linked to those of the final indicator area
(discussed in 5.5.2) that deal with the ability of Indigenous Peoples to use and implement their
rights, including the right to free, prior and informed consent. Thus these two sections should be
viewed as complementary.
5.5.2. Ability of Indigenous Peoples to utilize and implement recognized rights, legal norms
and standards as well as self-government structures to promote and defend their Food
Sovereignty on the local/tribal/community, national and international levels (Indicator area 11
in the set of 11 indicator areas)
Indigenous Peoples are often insufficiently aware of their rights and could benefit from capacity
building and legal advice about collective and individual rights as well as guidance on how to
handle negotiations on informed consent regarding interventions on their lands and territories,
including the types of information and guarantees they should receive prior to giving consent.
Recognizing gender inequality as a major development constraint and acknowledging the specific
role of indigenous women as agents of change in sustainable development is also important.
Special emphasis should be placed on obtaining FPIC from indigenous women in all interventions
that affect their livelihoods or aim to strengthen their capabilities and their agency50 (IFAD,
2005).
The interrelated issues of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) and Access and Benefit-Sharing
(ABS) are briefly addressed below.
(a) Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
Physical property rights and intellectual property rights form a complex whole consisting of
cultural heritage, collective knowledge and territorial rights (Saugee, 1994, Posey and Dutfield,
1996, as cited by Tucker, 2004). The rights to define property and manage land and other
resources in ways compatible with local knowledge, cultural heritage and livelihood needs are all
related issues (Tucker, 2004). Several Indigenous Charters emphasize this important
relationship.51 The UN has made progress in recognizing that land and resource rights are
integrated with indigenous IPR. The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, the
COICA-UNDP Regional Meeting on Intellectual Property Rights and Biodiversity, the UNDP
Consultation on the Protection and Conservation of Indigenous Knowledge (Tucker, 2004) and
the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture all recognize the
inter-dependencies between land and other resource rights and intellectual property rights.
Conventionally, Intellectual Property Rights are conferred upon individuals and corporate
entities, and are not applicable in cases of community ownership or spiritual significance of
traditional knowledge. Instead, the laws protect the work of individual, identifiable authors or
inventors (UNDP, 2004). Article 29 of the 2007 UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, states that Indigenous Peoples are entitled to the recognition of the full ownership,
control and protection of their cultural and intellectual property. They have the right to special
measures to control, develop and protect their sciences, technologies and cultural manifestation,
including human and other genetic resources, seeds, medicines, knowledge of the properties of
fauna and flora, inland waterway and deep seabed genetic resources, oral traditions, literatures,
designs and visual and performing arts. However, these rights are often not respected and
50
Agency is the capacity for autonomous action in the face of constricting social sanctions and structural
inequalities.
51
The Charter of the Indigenous-Tribal Peoples of the Tropical Forests; The Indigenous Peoples’ Earth
Charter; The Declaration of Principles of the World Council of Indigenous Peoples.

59

Indigenous Peoples are often excluded from negotiations for the use of biogenetic resources in
their territories (Dutfield, 1997, UNPFII, 2005a). One study, for example, found that 7,000
patents had been granted for the unauthorized use of traditional knowledge or the
misappropriation of medicinal plants (Forero, 2003, cited in UNDP, 2004). For Indigenous
Peoples, protection of knowledge and resources, and continuation of customary laws and
practices related to land and resource use, are central to the maintenance of their cultural identity
and are aspects of human rights. The Maori in Aotearoa-New Zealand believe that even when
their knowledge is publicly disclosed, there is no automatic right to use it —that right must be
determined collectively (UNDP, 2004).
(b) Access and Benefit-Sharing
In October 2001, the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Access and Benefit-Sharing,
established by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, prepared
the Draft Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the
Benefits Arising out of their Utilization, an international regime to promote and safeguard the fair
and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources and designed to
assist State Parties in developing national legislation in this regard. The Guidelines recommend
that “respecting established legal rights of indigenous and local communities associated with the
genetic resources being accessed or where traditional knowledge associated with these genetic
resources is being accessed, the prior informed consent of indigenous and local communities and
the approval and involvement of the holders of traditional knowledge, innovations and practices
should be obtained, in accordance with their traditional practices, national access policies and
subject to domestic laws”. The Guidelines were subsequently adopted by the Conference of the
Parties at its VI session in April 2002 through Decision VI/24. Although they are not binding,
they nonetheless have the potential to influence the development of national access and benefitsharing laws.
This is significant because the Convention on Biological Diversity does not explicitly state that it
is necessary to get the FPIC of constituent communities, although it has been argued that the
requirement to obtain such consent is implicit in the text of the Convention which states in Article
8 j) “Subject to its national legislation, respect, preserve and maintain knowledge, innovations
and practices of indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant for
the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and promote their wider application
with the approval and involvement of the holders of such knowledge, innovations and practices
and encourage the equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of such
knowledge, innovations and practices”. Therefore, the Bonn Guidelines go one step further in this
regard, by offering an interpretation of the Convention that clarifies an outstanding ambiguity
(FAO, 2004).
The Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Access and Benefit-Sharing and the Working Group
on Article 8j. of the Convention on Biological Diversity, are developing indicators of access and
benefit-sharing because, “Without explicit recognition and protection of the rights of Indigenous
Peoples and local communities, there can be no respect, preservation or maintenance of
traditional knowledge for future generations.” (International Indigenous Forum on Biodiversity
(IIFB) opening statement in the CBD, 2006b).
Lessons from the Philippines suggest that creative approaches to obtaining consent from and
sharing benefits with local communities, including Indigenous Peoples, need to be developed, and
an effective institutional system put in place to implement these measures (Laird, 2001). Most

60

prospecting for commercial exploitation of biodiversity focuses on traditional knowledge systems
of food and medicinal species, often dating back hundreds of years and involving complex
cultural relationships between people and the natural world. Of the approximately 120
pharmaceutical products derived from plants in 1985, 75% were discovered through the study of
their traditional medical use (Farnsworth et al., 1985 cited by Laird, 2001). National access and
benefit-sharing measures have nonetheless often failed to compensate Indigenous Peoples
adequately and there is an urgent need to develop fair benefit-sharing with local communities
(Laird, 2001).
The complex challenges of enforcing Indigenous Peoples’ intellectual property rights and fair
access and benefit-sharing are still far from adequately met and concerted efforts are required
before their customary knowledge is protected and/or fairly compensated. Indicators proposed by
agencies working in these areas include measures of the level of awareness of intellectual
property rights and access and benefit-sharing amongst affected Indigenous Peoples and what
legislation is in place and is enforced to regulate access and benefit-sharing. Indicators developed
at the 2nd Global Consultation (Appendix table 2) include laws to protect the collective biocultural heritage and the level of awareness of ‘rights’.

61

Chapter 6
Conclusions and recommendations
Indigenous Peoples, who represent at least 5000 culturally diverse indigenous groups, constitute
about 5.5 percent of the world’s population and account for a large share of the world’s cultural
and biological diversity; yet they are largely marginalized in most countries where they are
heavily represented among the poor. Poverty eradication efforts have largely bypassed indigenous
communities. Conventional indicators of poverty generally do not capture the realities of many
Indigenous Peoples who have been deprived of the rights to self-determination, access to their
traditional lands, territories and resources, and food and food sovereignty. Indigenous Peoples’
cultural practices and traditional food systems are mutually supportive and both are vital for their
food security and overall well-being, yet these systems are being degraded or destroyed for a
number of reasons discussed in the paper. Confronted with this situation, Indigenous Peoples are
increasingly conscious of the need to engage in policy dialogue and negotiations with decisionmakers to protect their rights and their food and agro-ecological systems and to restore them
where needed. For this, they need good, reliable data to support their arguments. While a number
of UN bodies and specialized agencies, government agencies and NGOs are involved in the
development of relevant indicators, actual data on Indigenous Peoples’ well-being remain scarce.
Hence, the need to develop indicators that reflect their particular vision and to collect and analyse
data on these indicators.
6.1 Relationships between Indigenous Peoples’ cultures and food and agro-ecological
systems

The suggested indicator areas in Table 1 reflect the high level of complexity in the relationships
between Indigenous Peoples’ cultures and food and agro-ecological systems and in the ways in
which changes in one aspect has repercussions for other aspects of these relationships. Research
findings throw light on some of these relationships - such as the relationship between secure
tenure and cultural identity and the implications for biodiversity and food security if either are
undermined. However, there are some areas where more research is needed, such as the indicator
areas on adaptability and resilience and on self-determination. A summary of the relationships
that are substantiated with evidence from research or from UN recognition in declarations,
conventions and covenants are listed below according to three categories: i) food and agroecosystems,
ii)
land
tenure
and
iii)
knowledge,
beliefs
and
practices:
Food and agro-ecosystems
1. Biodiversity is positively related to the availability of a wide range of traditional food crops
and wild foods;
2. The loss of forest habitat results in the loss of traditional supplementary foods and medicinal
plants;
3. Market expansion for cash cropping or extensive livestock raising may lead to deforestation
and/or a reduction in subsistence agriculture and the displacement or permanent loss of some
food crops and the associated knowledge and practices;
4. Sacred sites (for example, sacred forest groves) are associated with the preservation of
biodiversity;
5. There is considerable concern that the use of Genetic Use Restriction Technology (GURT)
negatively affects traditional crop varieties, local wild plant, animal and fish foods, traditional
ecological knowledge (TEK), and traditional cultural practices associated with traditional food
and agro-ecological systems; and

62

6. The use of traditional foods contributes to positive health outcomes.
Land Tenure
1. Secure land tenure systems strengthen cultural identity;
2. Insecure land tenure is associated with increased land alienation, for instance, for mining,
plantations, logging;
3. Agricultural transformation is associated with reduced tenure security for women farmers, loss
of women’s rights and status, and individualization of land and production practices which
disrupt traditional ways of life;
4. Land privatization is associated with the erosion of customary land rights and traditional
resource management practices;
5. Sacred sites are important for cultural identity and for the preservation of common property
systems; and
6. Self-determination is required for sustainable development and resource conservation.
Knowledge, Practices and Worldview
1. Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) is lost through acculturation processes which occur
in several ways;
2. Rural to urban migration causes a disconnection from the environment and a subsequent loss in
TEK;
3. Loss of language is associated with loss of cultural identity and cultural continuity and a
reduction in TEK;
4. Market expansion reduces the frequency of engagement in traditional exchange systems and
traditional systems of reciprocity;
5. Development activity (such as mining) has not necessarily been associated with reduced
traditional spiritual practices but is associated with environmental degradation;
6. Some traditional cultural practices such as time spent in the bush can reduce psychological
distress; and
7. Strong and vibrant local institutions are important for the survival of cultural norms and
practices.
The 1st and 2nd Global Consultations for Indigenous Peoples on the Right to Food and Food
Security have made significant progress in the identification of indicator areas relevant to
Indigenous Peoples’ concerns to protect their food sovereignty and deal with the threats to their
traditional food systems, access to land and resources, cultural practices related to food systems,
adaptive strategies for resilient food systems and the right to self-determination. The indicator areas
agreed upon by consensus reflect the culmination of many years of dialogue among Indigenous
Peoples and their organizations. The indicator areas now require the development of a set of
measurable indices and a methodology for their implementation.
6.2 Recommendations
For all stakeholders:
1. A re-definition of development that emphasizes the importance of culture52 is needed, so
that the values identified as key to Indigenous Peoples’ survival move into the mainstream.

52

“Development with identity is the project of life of the Indigenous Peoples based on their own logic and
worldview. It is the natural growth of Indigenous Peoples, of their flora and of their fauna based on
principles of self-determination in relation to land, territories, and natural resources. It is also respect for

63

2. The role of culture in sustainable agricultural and rural development should be made
more explicit in guiding development policy relating to Indigenous Peoples’ rights to food and
food security. Current policies are inadequate and there is a paucity of data to inform policy
development and monitor the impacts of development interventions on Indigenous Peoples’
culture, food security and well-being.
For Governments:
3. The rights of Indigenous Peoples to their traditional lands, territories and resources (as
called for in UN declarations, conventions and covenants) should be protected, maintained or
restored and indicators developed and applied to monitor progress in and impacts of such
measures on Indigenous Peoples.
4. Since the security of common property systems of tenure contributes to cultural identity
and well-being, such communal systems governed by customary law, traditional knowledge
and cultural practices should be protected in indigenous areas. Indicators should be developed
and applied to measure progress and impacts of such measures on indigenous common
property tenure systems.
5. Threats to Indigenous Peoples’ traditional food systems are numerous and governments,
assisted by international organizations as appropriate, should make efforts to reduce the
vulnerability of indigenous communities to these threats. Indigenous Peoples’ rights to food
sovereignty should be respected, including their rights to chose their own food systems,
maintain their cultural practices, utilize their food-related knowledge and be protected from
the spread of GMOs, monocultures and other activities that undermine traditional food
production systems. Indicators should be developed to monitor the situation and impacts of
any measures undertaken to improve Indigenous Peoples’ conditions and rights in these
respects.
6. Governments should implement measures to ensure that Indigenous Peoples’ free, prior
and informed consent is obtained before developments are undertaken in their lands and
territories, and that they receive adequate compensation for lost resources and a fair share of
benefits obtained from the commercial exploitation of these resources. Indicators to measure
compliance and impacts should be introduced.
7. Indigenous Peoples require support for capacity-building and financial resources to
monitor the cultural impacts of changes to their food systems. Due to the contextual nature
of cultural indicators, it is crucial that Indigenous Peoples be involved in collecting and
analysing such data themselves (as suggested also by the UNPFII (2006)), and national
governments should facilitate and support these efforts.
For UN organizations:
8. Networking and collaboration among UN organizations which are developing indicators
is essential in order to avoid duplication, enhance synergies and reduce costs. In addition to
collaboration on the many initiatives currently underway to develop cultural indicators, it is
also important to disaggregate by indigenous/non-indigenous populations data collected in
their individual and collective rights. It is the welfare and security of our peoples.” (2nd Global
Consultation on the Right to Food and Food Security for Indigenous Peoples, Nicaragua, September 2006).

64

other relevant on-going surveys and to include indicators related to the right to food and food
security in existing survey instruments, frameworks and methodologies, disaggregated by
indigenous/non-indigenous population groups.
9. Research is needed to ascertain how UN agencies are using or planning to use indicators
and associated data sets on Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems in their
own organizations, with a view to mainstreaming Indigenous Peoples’ issues within their
organizations’ policies and work programmes and providing a reasoned basis, substantiated by
facts and figures, for advocacy for policy and legal reforms to ensure Indigenous Peoples’
rights. Coordination among these efforts would reinforce synergies and impacts.
For Indigenous Peoples’ organizations:
10. Research and discussion among Indigenous Peoples and Indigenous Peoples’
Organizations on establishing thresholds and targets for specific indicators, and the
collection and analysis of data on these indicators, are needed in order to improve the
relevance and effectiveness of policy development.
11. Indigenous Peoples should be encouraged to apply the cultural indicators on food and
agro-ecological systems, collect and analyze data, publish and disseminate conclusions and
key factors/data to policy makers in order to press for policy and legal reforms and measure
the impact of such reforms.
12. Indigenous Peoples should be informed about the IITC cultural indicator development
programme and this paper. Traditional authorities should be encouraged to discuss and
address issues related to these indicators with a view to improving their effectiveness in
capturing the specific realities of Indigenous Peoples’ food and agro-ecological systems.
13. Indigenous Peoples need to play a more proactive role in the policy arena to enhance
understanding of the role of culture in their food and agro-ecological systems, sound the
alert on possible threats from various types of development and advocate for their rights to
the protection and respect for their traditional food systems and their food sovereignty.
Their effectiveness in these efforts will be enhanced if they are supported by appropriate and
reliable data.

65

References
Abel, N., Cumming, D. H. M. & Anderies, J. M.. 2006. Collapse and reorganization in socialecological systems: questions, some ideas, and policy implications. Ecology and Society 11(1):
17. (also available at www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss1/art17/).
Adelson, N. 1998. Health beliefs and the politics of Cree well-being. Health 2(1): 5-22.
African Environment Outlook. 2004. African Environment Outlook 1. Biodiversity. UNESCO.
Paris.
Altieri, M.A. 1995. Agroecology : the science of sustainable agriculture. Boulder, Colorado.
Westview Press, London: IT Publications.
Amnesty International. 2001. Americas: Indigenous people at high risk of human rights
violations. (available at www.amnesty.org/en/alfresco_asset/67c966df-a39c-11dc-9d08f145a8145d2b/amr010082001en.pdf).

Amoako-Atta, B. 1995. Sacred Groves in Ghana. In: Von Broste, B., Plachter, H. & Rossler, M.
(eds.) Sacred Sites, Cultural Integrity and Biological Diversity.
Anderson, T. & Poppel, B. 2002. Living Conditions in the Arctic. Social Indicators Research,
58: 191–216.
Ashley, C. & Carney, D. 1999. Sustainable livelihoods: Lessons from early experience.
Department for International Development (DFID). London.
Assembly of First Nations. 1990. Towards Linguistic Justice for First Nations. Principles for
Revitalization of First Nations’ Languages.
Assembly of First Nations. 2006. First Nations' Holistic Approach to Indicators. Ottawa, United
Nations Secretariat of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
Baleé, W. 1993. Indigenous Transformation of Amazonian Forests. L’Homme: 126-128. 231254.
Balee, W. 2004. An indigenous Associação in Eastern Amazonian Brazil. 2nd Sesquiannual
Conference of the Society for the Anthropology of Lowland South America, Florida International
University, North Miami Campus, Miami, Florida.
Baranyi, S. & Weitzner, V.. 2006. Transforming land-related conflict: policy, practice and
possibilities: background paper. Ottawa and Rome, North South Institute and International Land
Coalition: 40.
Barthlott, W., Biedinger, N., Braun, G., Feig, F., Kier, G. & Mutke, J.. 1999. Terminological
and methodological aspects of the mapping and analysis of global biodiversity. Acta Botanica
Finnica 162: 103-110.

66

Benz, B.F., Cevallos E. J., Santana M. F., Rosales A. J. & Graf M. S. 2000. Losing
knowledge about plant use in the Sierra de Manantlan Biosphere Reserve, Mexico. Economic
Botany 54:183-191.
Borrini-Feyerabend, G., Michel Pimbert, M., Farvar, T., Kothari, A. & Renard, Y. with
Jaireth, H., Murphree, M., Pattemore, V., Ramirez, R., & Warren, P. 2004. Sharing Power:
Learning by doing in co-management of natural resources throughout the world. London, IIED
and IUCN.
Bruce, J. 2000. African tenure models at the turn of the century: individual property models and
common property models. Land Reform 2000 (1). FAO Information Division. Rome.
Byrceson, D. 2000. Rural Africa at the crossroads: Livelihood practices and policies. Natural
Resource Perspectives 52: April 2000. London, Overseas Development Institute.
Carino, J. 2005. Indigenous Peoples, Human Rights and Poverty. In Tebtebba Foundation,
Making the MDGs Relevant for Indigenous Peoples. Indigenous Perspectives. Volume vii, No. 1:
28-46. Philippines, Tebtebba Foundation.
Carney, D., ed. 1998. Sustainable Rural Livelihoods: What contribution can we make?
Department for International Development (DFID). London.
CBD. 2005. Indicators for assessing progress towards the 2010 biodiversity target: status of
traditional knowledge, innovations and practices. Ad Hoc Open-ended Inter-Sessional Working
Group on Article 8(j) and Related Provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity. Fourth
meeting, Granada, Spain: 10.
CBD. 2006. International Indigenous Forum on Biodiversity (IIFB). Conference of the Parties
Eighth Meeting. Curitiba, Brazil
CBD. 2004. Akwé: Kon Voluntary Guidelines for the conduct of cultural, environmental and
social impact assessments regarding developments proposed to take place on, or which are likely
to impact on, sacred sites and on lands and waters traditionally occupied or used by indigenous
and local communities. Montreal, Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Chandler, M. J. & Lalonde, C. 1998. Cultural Continuity as a Hedge Against Suicide in
Canada's First Nations. Transcultural Psychiatry, 35(2): 191-219.
Chouin,
G.
2002.
IDS
Bulletin
www.ids.ac.uk/ids/bookshop/bulletin/bull331abs.htm)

abstracts.

(available

at

CIP-UPWARD. 2003. Conservation and Sustainable Use of Agricultural Biodiversity. A
Sourcebook. Philippines, Laguna, CIP-UPWARD.
Colchester, M., Griffiths, T., Mackay, F. & Nelson, J. 2004. Indigenous Land Tenure:
Challenges and Possibilities. Land Reform. Land Settlement and Cooperatives. FAO. Rome.
Commonwealth Foundation. 2005. Breaking with Business as Usual: Perspectives from Civil
Society in the Commonwealth on the Millennium Development Goals. London, Commonwealth
Foundation.

67

Condit, R., Robinson, W.D., Ibánez, R., Aguilar, S., Sanjur, A., Martínez, R., Stallard, R.,
García, T., Angehr, G., Petit, L., Wright, S.J,, Robinson. T.R. & Heckadon. S. 2001.
Maintaining the canal while conserving biodiversity around it: a challenge for economic
development in Panama in the 21st century. Bioscience 51: 389-398.
Cornell, S. & Kalt. J. P. 1998. Sovereignty and Nation-Building: The Development Challenge
in Indian Country Today. Joint Occasional Papers on Native Affairs. 2002-03. Reprinted from
American Indian Culture and Research Journal, 22(3): 187-214.
Craig, F. E. & Tester, F. J. 1992. Indigenous Peoples: Reassessing Directions for SIA. In C. C.
Geisler, R. Green, D. Usner and P. West, eds. Indian SIA: The Social Impact Assessment of
Rapid Resource Development on Native Peoples. University of Michigan.
Crawhill, N. 2006. MDGs, Globalisation and Indigenous Peoples in Africa.
DeLind, L. & Bingen, J. 2004. Introduction. Culture and Agriculture 27(2): 88-91.
Descola, P. & Palsson, G., eds. 1996. Nature and Society.
London, Routledge.

Anthropological Perspectives.

DFID. 2000.
Sustainable Livelihoods Framework Guidance Sheets (available at
www.livelihoods.org/info/guidance_sheets_rtfs/Sect2.rtf). London, Department for International
Development.
du Guerny, J. 1996. Gender, Land and Fertility - Women's Access to Land and Security of
Tenure (available at www.fao.org).
Dutfield, G. 1997. Between a rock and a hard place: Indigenous peoples, nation states and the
multinationals. University of Oxford, Oxford. Programme for Traditional Resource Rights,
Oxford Centre for the Environment, Ethics and Society.
ECLAC. 2006. Report of the Workshop on Indicators for follow-up of the AGRO 2015 Plan for
the Improvement of Agriculture and Rural Life in the Summit of the Americas. Port of Spain,
Trinidad and Tobago.
Elford, D. 2002. Conservation by self determination in Central America. Fourth World Journal
5(1): 98-149.
Encyclopedia
of
the
Nations.
2007.
Bolivia
www.nationsencyclopedia.com/economies/Americas/Bolivia.html).

(available

at

Ericksen, P. & Woodley, E. 2005. Using Multiple Knowledge Systems: Benefits and
Challenges. In D. Capistrano, C. Samper, M. J. Lee & C. Raudsepp-Hearne eds. Ecosystems
and Human Well-Being. Multiscale Assessments. Washington, Covelo, London, Island Press.
Esmail, T. 1997. Designing and scaling-up productive natural resource management programs:
Decentralization and Institutions for Collective Action. Decentralization, Fiscal Systems and
Rural Development Programme. Technical Consultation on Decentralization, 16-18 December
1997. FAO, Rome.

68

Fairhead, J. and Leach, M. 1996. Misreading the African Landscape. African Studies Series
90. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

FAO. 1996. Declaration and Plan of Action. World Food Summit, 13-17 November,
Rome.
FAO. 1998. Managing forests as common property by J.E.M. Arnold. FAO Forestry
Paper 136. Rome.
FAO. 1999. Legal Bases for the Management of Forest Resources as Common Property,
by J.W. Bruce. Rome.
FAO. 2002. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2001. Rome.
FAO. 2003. Multilingual Thesaurus on Land Tenure, edited by Ciparisse, G. Rome
FAO. 2004. Building on Gender, Agro-biodiversity and Local Knowledge. A Training Manual.
Rome.
FAO. 2005. Rapid guide for missions. Analysing local institutions and livelihoods, by A. Carloni.
Rural Institutions and Participation Service series: Institutions for Rural Development No.1.
FAO. 2006. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2006. Rome
FAO. 2006. Final Declaration of the International Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development (ICAARD). Porto Alegre, Brazil, 7-10 March 2006.
FAO. 2007a. Indigenous Peoples’ Right to Food, by L. Knuth, L. Rome (available at
www.fao.org/righttofood/)
FAO. 2007b. The Right to Food. Questions and Answers. Rome.
FAO. 2007c. SARD and Indigenous Culture. The SARD Initiative. Rome (available at
www.fao.org/sard).
Fingleton, J. S. 1998. Legal Recognition of Indigenous Groups. FAO Legal Papers Online
(available at www.fao.org).
Four Directions Council. 1996. Forests, Indigenous Peoples, and Biodiversity: Contribution of
the Four Directions Council to the Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Lethbridge, FDC.
Gadgil, M. & Gokhale, Y. 2005. Summary of India Local Assessment for Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment. In D. Capistrano, C. Samper, M. J. Lee & C. Raudsepp-Hearne eds.
Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Multiscale Assessments, pp. 333-334. Washington, Covelo,
London, Island Press.
Global Land Tool Network. 2006. Development of innovative pro-poor land tools. Report from
a workshop jointly organized by UN-HABITAT, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Norad, the Norwegian Mapping Authority and Sida. Oslo, 23-24 March 2006.

69

Godoy, R.., Kirby, K. & Wilkie, D. 2001. Tenure security, private time preference, and use of
natural resources among lowland Bolivian Amerindians. Ecological Economics 38: 105-118.
Godoy, R., Reyes-García, V., Byron, E., Leonard, W.R. & Vadez, V. 2005. The Effect of
Market Economies on the Well-Being of Indigenous Peoples and on Their Use of Renewable
Natural Resources." Annual Review of Anthropology 34: 121-138.
Goodland, R. 2006. Suriname. Environmental and Social Reconnaissance. The Bakhuys Bauxite
Mine Project. A report prepared for The Association of Indigenous Village Leaders of Suriname
(VIDS) and The North-South Institute (NSI).
Griffiths, T. & Colchester, M. 2000. Indigenous peoples, forests, and the World Bank. UK,
Moreton-in-Marsh. Forest Peoples Programme.
Harmon, D. 2002. In Light of our Differences: How Diversity in Nature and Culture makes us
Human. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Institution Press.
Harmon, D., Loh, J. et al. 2005. Measuring Traditional Environmental Knowledge for the
Convention on Biological Diversity.
HLCLEP. 2006. First Meeting of the HLCLEP Co-Chair’s Outcome Document, UN High Level
Commission on Legal Empowerment of the Poor.
HRI/MC. 2006. International Human Rights Instruments. Report on indicators for monitoring
compliance with international human rights instruments. Eighteenth meeting of chairpersons of
the human rights treaty bodies, Geneva, 22-23 June 2006; Fifth inter-committee meeting of the
human rights treaty bodies, Geneva, 19-21 June 2006.
Human Rights Council. 2006. Resolution 2006/2. Working group of the Commission on Human
Rights to elaborate a draft declaration in accordance with paragraph 5 of the General Assembly
resolution 49/214 of 23 December 1994.
IASG. 2006. Report of the Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Issues. New York, UN
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
IFAD. 2003. Indigenous Peoples and Sustainable Development. Roundtable Discussion Paper
for the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary Session of IFAD’s Governing Council. Rome.
IFAD. 2005. Free, Prior and Informed Consent and Beyond. The Experience of IFAD.
International Workshop on Methodologies Regarding Free, Prior and Informed Consent and
Indigenous Peoples, 17-19 January 2005. New York, UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
IFAD. Date n.a. Indigenous Peoples (available at www.ifad.org).
IIFB. 2006a. Cross-cutting Approaches to the Implementation and Monitoring of the Goals MDG
7: Indicators Relevant for Indigenous Peoples and the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Indigenous International Forum on Biodiversity. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Fifth
Session: 2., New York, UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.

70

IIFB. 2006b. Opening Statement. Convention on Biological Diversity, Conference of the Parties,
Eighth Meeting, 20-31 March 2006, Curitiba, Brazil. International Indigenous Forum on
Biodiversity (IIFB).
IITC. 2002. An analysis of United States international policy on Indigenous Peoples, the human
right to food and food security. Palmer, Arkansas, International Indian Treaty Council.
IITC. 2002. Declaration of Atitlán. Indigenous Peoples’ Consultation on the Right to Food: A
Global Consultation, 17-19 April 2002. Sololá, Guatemala.
IITC. 2003. Final Report on an Indigenous Peoples' Initiative to Establish Cultural Indicators for
SARD: Questionnaire on Indigenous Peoples' Traditional Foods and Cultures. Palmer, Arkansas,
International Indian Treaty Council.
IITC. 2004. Human Rights, the Right to Food, and Indigenous Peoples. Palmer, Arkansas,
International Indian Treaty Council.
IITC. 2006. Framework and summary of key issues for the development of cultural indicators for
food security, food sovereignty and sustainable development. Paper for the Meeting on
Indigenous Peoples and Indicators of Well-Being, Aboriginal Policy Research Conference, 22-23
March, Ottawa. Palmer, Arkansas, International Indian Treaty Council.
IITC. 2006. Cultural Indicators for Food Security, Food Sovereignty and Sustainable
Development. Conclusions and Recommendations. The Second Global Consultation on the Right
to Food, Food Security and Food Sovereignty for Indigenous Peoples, 7-9 September 2006.
Bilwi, Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua.
ILO. 1957. Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention (No. 107). Geneva.
ILO. 1958. Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention (No. 111). Geneva.
ILO. 1989. Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention (No. 169). Geneva.
ILO. 2007. Newsletter. The ILO and Indigenous and Tribal Peoples. Geneva.
IMF. 2001. Factsheet. Washington DC.
Indigenous Peoples' Seattle Declaration 1999. Indigenous Peoples' Seattle Declaration, Third
Ministerial Meeting of the World Trade Organization.
Inter-American Development Bank. 2004-2007. Studies on land titling and registration
(available at www.iadb.org/sds/xindicators).
Inter-American Development Bank. 2006. Social Indicators and Equity Information System for
Latin America and the Caribbean, by J.A. Mejia (available at www.iadb.org/sds/xindicators).
IUCN 1997. Indigenous Peoples and Sustainability. Cases and Actions. IUCN Inter-Commission
Task Force on Indigenous Peoples. Utrecht, the Netherlands, International Books.

71

IWGIA. 2004. Land Rights: A Key Issue. Indigenous Affairs Newsletter 4/04 (available at
www.iwgia.org/graphics/SynkronLibrary/Documents/publications/Downloadpublications/IndigenousAffairs/IA42004.pdf).
IWGIA. 2006. UN Forum urges inclusion of indigenous peoples' concerns in global anti-poverty
goals. International Working Group on Indigenous Affairs.
Jodha, N.S. 1990. Common property resources – Contributions and crisis. Economic and
Political Weekly, June 30, A65-A78.
Johns, T. 2004. Agrobiodiversity, diet and human health. In D. I. Jarvis, C. Padoch & D. Cooper,
eds. Managing Biodiversity in Agricultural Ecosystems. New York, Columbia University Press.
Johnston, B.R. 2005. Chixoy Dam Legacy Issues Study. Volume 3: Consequential Damage
Assessment of Chixoy River Basin Communities: Material Consequences of Dam Construction,
Involuntary Displacement and Damage and Loss of Critical Resources.
Kapijimpanga, O. 2005. Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers and the Millennium Development
Goals. In Commonwealth Foundation. Breaking with Business as Usual: Perspectives from Civil
Society in the Commonwealth on the Millennium Development Goals. London, Commonwealth
Foundation.
King, A. B. & Eyzaguirre, P. B. 1999. Intellectual property rights and agricultural biodiversity:
Literature addressing the suitability of IPR for the protection of indigenous resources. Agriculture
and Human Values 16: 41-49.
Kirmayer, L. J., Boothroyd, L. J., Tanner, A., Adelson, N. & Robinson, E. 2000.
Psychological Distress Among the Cree of James Bay. Transcultural Psychiatry 37(1): 35–56.
Kuhnlein, H.V. 2005. Task Force: Indigenous Peoples' Food Systems and Nutrition,
International Union of Nutritional Sciences.
Kuhnlein, H. V., Smitasiri, S., Yesudas, S., Bhattacharjee, L., Dan, L. & Ahmed, S. 2006.
Documenting Traditional Food Systems of Indigenous Peoples: International Case Studies.
Guidelines for Procedures. Montreal, 2004 Centre for Indigenous Peoples’ Nutrition and
Environment, McGill University, Canada: 120.
Kurien, J. 2001. The socio-cultural aspects of fisheries: Implications for food and livelihood
security - A Case Study of Kerala State, India. Rome, FAO.
Laaksonen, A. & Foundation, I. 2005. Third Global Forum on Human Development: Defining
and Measuring Cultural Exclusion. Paris.
Laird, S. A. 2001. The Convention on Biological Diversity: changing ethical and legal
frameworks for biodiversity research and prospecting. Unasylva No. 206. Rome, FAO.
Livestock in Development. 1998. The Integration of Livestock Interventions into a sustainable
Rural Livelihoods Approach. In Carney, D., ed. Sustainable Rural Livelihoods: What
contribution can we make? Department for International Development (DFID). London.

72

Lizarralde, M. 2001. Biodiversity and loss of indigenous languages and knowledge in South
America. In L. Maffi, ed. On Biocultural Diversity: Linking Language, Knowledge, and the
Environment, pp. 265-81. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Institution Press.
Loh, J. & Harmon, D. 2005. A global index of biocultural diversity. Ecological Indicators 5:
231-241.
MacKay, F. 2004. Indigenous peoples’ rights to lands, territories and resources: selected
international and domestic legal considerations. Land reform, land settlement and cooperatives
2004/1: 80-95. Rome, FAO.
Maffi, L. ed. 2001. On Biocultural Diversity: Linking Language, Knowledge and the
Environment. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Institution Press.
Mainka, S. & Trivedi, M. Eds. 2002. Links between biodiversity conservation, livelihoods and
food security: the sustainable use of wild species for meat. Occasional papers of the IUCN
Species Survival Commission; No. 24. Gland, Switzerland; Cambridge, UK, IUCN.
Mckinley, T. 1997. Cultural Indicators of Development. Paris, UNRISD/UNESCO: 19.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-being. Synthesis.
Washington, DC, Island Press.
Moore, S. E., Leslie-Young, H. & Lavis, C.A. 2005. Subjective well-being and life satisfaction
in the kingdom of Tonga. Social Indicators Research 70: 287–311.
Mühlhäusler, P. 1996. Linguistic Ecology: Language Change and Linguistic Imperialism in the
Pacific Rim. London, Routledge.
Nations, J. D. 2001. Indigenous Peoples and Conservation: Misguided Myths in the Maya
Tropical Forest. In: L. Maffi, ed. On Biocultural Diversity. Linking Language, Knowledge, and
the Environment. Washington, DC, Smithsonian Institution Press.
Nichols, E. 2002. Indigenous Self-Determination over Land-based Cultural Heritage: A
Comparative Study of Australian Aborigines, Native Americans and Papua New Guinean
Customary Landholders. Asia Pacific Journal of Environmental Law 7(issue 3/4).
Nyamugasira, W. 2005. Civil society and the Millennium Development Goals in the
Commonwealth. In Commonwealth Foundation. Breaking with Business as Usual: Perspectives
from Civil Society in the Commonwealth on the Millennium Development Goals. London,
Commonwealth Foundation.
O'Faircheallaigh, C. 1999. Making Social Impact Assessment Count: A Negotiation-Based
Approach for Indigenous People. Society and Natural Resources 12(1): 63-80.
Pant, L. P. (in progress). Linking crop diversity with food traditions and food security in the hills
of Nepal. School of Rural Planning and Development. Guelph, University of Guelph.
Parlee, B. & Marlowe, E. 2000. Traditional Knowledge Study of Community Health, West
Kitikmeot, Slave Study (available at www.wkss.nt.ca).

73

Pomeroy, C. & Jacob, S. 2004. From Mangos to Manufacturing: Uneven Development and its
Impact on Social Well-Being in the Dominican Republic. Social Indicators Research 65: 73–107.
Posey, D.A., ed. 1999. Cultural and Spiritual Values of Biodiversity. London/Nairobi,
Intermediate Technology Publications and UNEP.
Psacharopoulos, G. & Patrinos, H.A. 1994. Indigenous people and poverty in Latin America:
An empirical analysis. World Bank, Washington, DC
Rao, V. & Walton, M., eds. 2004. Culture and public action. Washington, DC,
World Bank.
Rappaport, J. 2004. Between Sovereignty and Culture: Who is an Indigenous Intellectual in
Colombia? IRSH 49 Supplement: 111–132.
Rass, N. 2006. Policies and Strategies to address the Vulnerability of Pastoralists in SubSaharan Africa. Pro-Poor Livestock Policy Initiative, Working Paper 37. FAO, Rome.
Receveur, O. & Kuhnlein, H. V. 1998. Benefits of traditional food in Dene/Metis communities.
Proceedings of the X Congress of International Union on Circumpolar Health. International
Journal of Circumpolar Health 57, Suppl. 1: 219-222.
Receveur, O., Boulay, M. & Kuhnlein, H.V. 1997. Decreasing traditional food use affects diet
quality for adult Dene/Métis in 16 communities of the Canadian Northwest Territories. Journal of
Nutrition 127: 2179-2186.
Reyes-García, V., Vadez, V., Tanner, S., McDade,T., Huanca, T. & Leonard, W.R. 2006.
Evaluating Indices of traditional ecological knowledge: A methodological contribution. Journal
of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2(21): 1-9.
Reyhner, J. 2001. Cultural Survival vs. Forced Assimilation: the renewed war on diversity.
Cultural Survival Quarterly 25(2).
Riddell, J. C. 2000. Emerging trends in land tenure reform: Progress towards a unified theory.
Land Tenure Service. Rome, FAO.
Salehi, M., Kuhnlein, H.V., Shahbazi, M., Kimiagar, S.M., Kolahi, A.A. & Mehrabi, Y.
2005. Effect of traditional food on nutrition improvement of Iranian tribeswomen. Ecology of
Food and Nutrition 44(1):81-95.
SBSTTA 2003. Report of the Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group Meeting on the Potential Impacts
of Genetic Use Restriction Technologies on Smallholder Farmers, Indigenous and Local
Communities and Farmers' Rights. Subsidiary Body for the Scientific, Technological and
Technical Advice. New York, Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Shepherd, C. J. 2004. Agricultural Development NGOs, Anthropology and the Encounter with
Cultural Knowledge. Culture and Agriculture 27(1): 35-44.
Shiva, V., Anderson, P., Schücking, H., Gray, A., Lohmann, L. & Cooper, D. 1995.
Biodiversity. Social & Ecological Perspectives. London and New Jersey, Zed Books.

74

Stavenhagen, R. 2000. Culture and Poverty. In UNESCO, Cultural Diversity, Conflict and
Pluralism. Paris, UNESCO.
Stavenhagen, R. 2004. Indigenous Peoples and Cultural Diversity. A Conceptual Outline and
Proposals. Paris, UNESCO (available at www.portal.unesco.org/culture/en).
Stavenhagen, R. 2007. Oral statement by Mr. Rodolfo Stavenhagen, Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people. UN Permanent Forum
on Indigenous Issues, Sixth session, 14-25 May 2007, 6th Item on the Agenda: Half-day
discussion on Asia. New York.
Stephens, C., Porter, J., Nettleton, C. & Willis, R. 2006. Disappearing, displaced, and
undervalued: a call to action for Indigenous health worldwide. The Lancet 367: 2019-2028.
Stepp, J.R., Cervone, S., Casteneda, H., Lasseter, A., Stocks, G. & Gichon, Y. 2004.
Development of a GIS for global biocultural diversity. In G. Borrini-Feyerabend, G.K.
MacDonald & L. Maffi, eds. History, Culture and Conservation. Special Issue, Policy Matters
13: 267-270.
Suminguit, V.J. 2005. Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Intellectual Property Rights: an
Enabling Tool for Development with Identity. Paper presented at the Workshop on Traditional
Knowledge, the United Nations and Indigenous Peoples, 21-23 September, Panama City.
Tauli-Corpuz, V. 2005. Indigenous Peoples and the Millennium Development Goals. New York,
UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
Tauli-Corpuz, V. & Tamang, P. 2007. Oil Palm and Other Commercial Tree Plantations,
Monocropping: Impacts on Indigenous Peoples’ Land Tenure and Resource Management
Systems and Livelihoods. Paper presented at the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues,
Sixth session, 14-25 May 2007. New York.
Tchoumba, B. 2005. Indigenous and Tribal Peoples and Poverty Reduction Strategies in
Cameroo. International Labour Organization (ILO) and Centre for Environment and
Development (CED).
Tebtebba Foundation. 2002. The Myth of Sustainable and Responsible Mining. Indigenous
Perspectives V(1).
Thomasson, G. C. 2001. Liberia's Seeds of Knowledge. Culture Survival Quarterly 15(3).
Thrupp, L.A. 1998 Cultivating Diversity. Washington, DC, World Resources Institute.
Thrupp, L. A. 2000. Linking Agricultural Biodiversity and Food Security: The Valuable Role of
Sustainable Agriculture. International Affairs (Royal Institute of International Affairs 1944-) 76
(2 Special Biodiversity Issue): 265-281.
Trosper, R. L. 2003. Resilience in Pre-Contact Pacific Northwest Social Ecological Systems.
Ecology and Society 7(3).
Tucker, C. M. 2004. Land Tenure Systems, and Indigenous Intellectual Property Rights.
Indigenous Intellectual Property Rights. Walnut Creek, California, AltaMira Press: 127-151.

75

United Nations. 1948. Universal Declaration on Human Rights. New York.
United Nations. 1966. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. New York.
United Nations. 1966. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. New
York.
United Nations. 1993. Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action. World Conference on
Human Rights, 14-25 June, Vienna.
United Nations. 2007. World Population Prospects: The 2006 Revision and World Urbanization
Prospects: The 2005 Revision. New York, Population Division, UN Department of Economic and
Social Affairs (also available at www.esa.un.org/unpp).
United Nations. 2007. Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. New York.
UNDP. 2004. Human Development Report 2004. Cultural liberty in today’s diverse world. New
York, United Nations Development Programme.
UNESCO. 2000. Cultural Diversity, Conflict and Pluralism. WORLD 2000. Paris.
UNESCO. 2003. Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. Paris.
UNFPA. 2007. State of World Population 2007. Unleashing the potential of urban growth. New
York.
United Nations University. 2005. Establishing a UNU initiative on traditional knowledge.
United Nations University, Institute for Advanced Studies.
UNPFII. 2004. Agents of Change. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Third Session, 10-21
May 2004. Backgrounder. New York.
UNPFII. 2005a. Indigenous Peoples and the Millennium Development Goals. Note by the
Secretariat. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Fourth Session, 16-27 May 2005,
E/C.19/2005/4/Add.13. New York.
UNPFII. 2005b. Report of the International Workshop on Traditional Knowledge, 21-23
September, Panama City. New York, Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
UNPFII. 2006. Report of the Meeting on Indigenous Peoples and Indicators of Well-Being. 2223 March, Ottawa. New York, Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
UNPFII. 2007a. Sixth Session, Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. Indigenous Peoples –
Lands, Territories and Natural Resources, 25 May 2007. Press release. New York.
UNPFII. 2007b. Sixth Session, Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. Indigenous Peoples –
Lands, Territories and Natural Resources, 14-25 May 2007. Backgrounder. New York.
Uphoff, N.T. 1986. Local institutional development: An analytical sourcebook with cases. West
Hartford, Ct., Kumarian Press.

76

Vadez, V., Reyes-García, V., Godoy, R.A., Apaza, V.L., Byron, E., Huanca, T., Leonard,
W.R., Pérez, E. & Wilkie, D. 2004. Does integration to the market threaten agricultural
diversity? Panel and cross-sectional data from a horticultural-foraging society in the Bolivian
Amazon. Human Ecology 32(5): 635-646.
Valdez, N. 1998. Ethnicity, class, and the indigenous struggle for land in Guerrero, Mexico. New
York, Garland Publications.
Verma, R. 2007. “We Are the Land, and the Land Is Us”: The Complexities of Land Tenure and
Struggles for Pastoralist Livelihoods in Kenya. SARD Initiative, FAO. Rome.
Vicente, B., Eyzaguirre, P. & Johns, T. (in press, 2008). The nutritional role of forest foods for
rural communities. In C. Colfer, ed. Human Health and Forests: A Global Interdisciplinary
Overview. London, Earthscan.
Villarreal, M. 2000. Culture, agriculture and rural development: a view from FAO's Population
Programme Service (available at www.fao.org).
Warren, P. 2003. Farming, Ruralness and National Cultures in post-colonial societies. A
comparative analysis of the ROA Project’s culture module findings. Rome, FAO.
Woolcock, M. 2001. Social Capital: The Bonds that Connect. Manila, Asian Development Bank.
World Bank. 2001. Social Development. Powerpoint presentation for the Seminar on Beyond
the Last Decade: Indigenous Movements and the Transformation of Development and Democracy
in Latin America. Princeton University.
The World Rainforest Movement. 1992. Charter of the Indigenous-Tribal Peoples of the
Tropical Forests. Penang, Malaysia.
Zarger, R.K. & Stepp, J.R. 2004. Persistence of botanical knowledge among Tzeltal Maya
children. Current Anthropology 45(3): 413-18.
Zent, S. 2001. Acculturation and ethnobotanical knowledge loss among the Piaroa of Venezuela:
Demonstration of a quantitative method for the empirical study of TEK change. In L. Maffi, ed.
On Biocultural Diversity: Linking Language, Knowledge, and the Environment. Washington, DC,
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Zent, S. & Lopez-Zent, E. (in press). On Biocultural Diversity from a Venezuelan Perspective:
Tracing the interrelationships among biodiversity, culture change, and legal reforms. In C.
McManis, ed. Biodiversity, Biotechnology and the Legal Protection of Traditional Knowledge.
Cambridge,
UK,
Cambridge
University
Press
(also
available
at
www.law.wustl.edu/centeris/Confpapers/PDFWrdDoc/ZentManuscript.html)
Zerner, C., ed. 2000. People, Plants and Justice. The Politics of Nature Conservation. New
York, Columbia University Press.

77

Appendix 1. Glossary of Terms
Access and Benefit Sharing (ABS) is the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from

use of genetic resources
Agro-ecological system - a land use system defined through the co-evolution of human culture
and ecosystems, such that both influence the land that is used for crops, pasture, and livestock, the
adjacent uncultivated land that supports other vegetation and wildlife, and the associated
atmosphere, the underlying soils, groundwater, and drainage networks.
Culture is a complex system of beliefs, values, language, knowledge and practices, as well as the
material and non-material products of human thought and action. Through social transmission and
over time, all human societies develop a cultural system specific to the social and ecological
context which identifies its bearers as a “cultural group” or a “culture”. It is a complex concept
and as a result there are difficulties involved in precisely defining “a culture”, and thus in
enumerating individual cultures (Maffi, 2001). Culture is also viewed as a set of institutions,
practices, behaviours, technologies, skills, knowledge, beliefs and values proper to a human
community. Culture is usually received, lived, refined, and reproduced at any given moment in
history (Borrini-Feyerabend et al., 2004). Cultures are highly dynamic constructs that change
through time and hybridize when exposed to contact and exchange with other cultures (Balandier,
1971, Amselle, 1990 cited by Warren, 2003).
Food security is a situation that exists when all people, at all times, have physical, social and
economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food
preferences for an active and healthy life (FAO, 2002).
Food sovereignty is the right of Peoples to define their own policies and strategies for the
sustainable production, distribution, and consumption of food, with respect for their own cultures
and their own systems of managing natural resources and rural areas, and is considered to be a
precondition for Food Security (The Atitlán Declaration on Food Sovereignty). It is the right of
Indigenous Peoples to define their own food and agriculture, to protect and regulate domestic
agricultural production and trade in order to achieve sustainable development objectives. For
more
discussion
see
Shiva
et
al.
(1995)
and
Via
Campesina
(http://www.viacampesina.org/main_en/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=180&Ite
mid=27).
Indigenous – people are considered indigenous either because they are descendants of those who
lived in the area before colonization, or because they have maintained their own social, economic,
cultural and political institutions since colonization and the establishment of new states (ILO
Convention No. 169). Self identification is crucial.
Poverty - There are a variety of ways to define poverty, each with their own strengths and
deficiencies. Development agencies often employ quantitative measures of poverty, such as those
setting a threshold of one or two dollars a day. Specific indicators relating to certain economic
and social factors (such as infant mortality and literacy rates) are also employed. But many
aspects of poverty, some of which are crucial to a human rights analysis, are not reflected in the
statistical indicators. Poverty is a human condition characterized by the sustained or chronic
deprivation of the resources, capabilities, choices, security and power necessary for the enjoyment

78

of an adequate standard of living and other civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights. In
the most comprehensive and rights-sensitive definition of poverty to date, the United Nations
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in its statement on poverty, defined poverty
as "a human condition characterized by the sustained or chronic deprivation of the resources,
capabilities, choices, security and power necessary for the enjoyment of an adequate standard of
living and other civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights." (E/C.12/2001/10) (OHCHR
website http://www.unhchr.ch/development/poverty-02.html)
Rights-based indicators – indicators that are relevant to indigenous and tribal peoples that take
into account processes of full, active and meaningful participation of indigenous and tribal
communities at all stages of data collection as well as indicators that are of particular significance
to Indigenous Peoples. These include access to territories (land and waters), access to resources,
and participation in decision-making, as well as issues of discrimination or exclusion in the areas
of economic, social and cultural rights. Rights based indicators to be used for data collection and
disaggregation on Indigenous Peoples should reflect the current status of the realization of their
human rights, be useful in policy articulation and prescription and should measure both the
process and the outcome of development activities. They should be able to measure dimensions of
the process of the realization of human rights, such as participation, non-discrimination,
empowerment and accountability (Tauli-Corpez, 2005).
Self-determination is the exercise of the right of a people to freely determine its social,
economic, political and cultural future without external influence (DeLaCruz, 1989 cited by
Elford, 2000). Central to the struggle for self-determination is the legal recognition of these
rights to land and resources53 (IWGIA, 1994).
Tenure is the relationship, whether legally or customarily defined among people as individuals or
groups, with respect to land and associated natural resources. Rules of tenure define how
resources are to be allocated within societies. Land tenure systems determine who can use what
resources for how long, and under what conditions." (FAO Multilingual Thesaurus on Land
Tenure)
Traditional food systems – a term understood to mean food that is procured either as wild or
cultivated over several generations and modified to suit local needs. It also refers to cultural
practices that are specific to the procurement of that food
Traditional knowledge: implied in the use of the word ‘traditional’ is how knowledge is
acquired and used, referring to the social processes of learning and sharing knowledge. The
knowledge may be new, but it has a social meaning and legal character (Four Directions Council,
1996).

53

Indigenous Peoples’ rights are grounded in the right to cultural integrity, which is a fundamental right
enshrined in a range of international instruments. The right of “all peoples” to self-determination, as
defined in common Article 1 of the international human rights covenants adopted by the United Nations in
1966. The United Nations Human Rights Committee (HRC) applies this right to Indigenous Peoples when
examining state-party reports under Article 40 of the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR). This right is also applied to Indigenous Peoples in the UN Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples.

79

Well-being: A context- and situation-dependent state, comprising basic material for a good life,
freedom and choice, health and bodily well-being, good social relations, security, peace of mind
and spiritual experience.

80

Appendix table 1 Cultural indicator areas suggested for measuring the state and trends in
Indigenous Peoples Food and Agro-ecological Systems, Rights to Food, Food Security and
Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development. Ten main Indicator areas (in bold capitals) are
listed with suggested sub-groupings (in italics) and suggested indicators for each area with the
sources of the indicators.
Suggested Indicator

Source

1. ACCESS TO AND INTEGRITY OF TRADITIONAL LANDS, WATERS AND HABITAT USED FOR FOOD
PRODUCTION, HARVESTING AND/OR GATHERING
Security of tenure: physical property rights
1. Recognition of indigenous governance and customary laws by state
governments

UNPFII 5 Indicators (2006)

2. Existence of legal frameworks for indigenous veto over the use of indigenous
lands
3. Prevalence of land disputes

FAO

4. Recognition/existence/continuation of traditional land tenure (including
common property regimes) of indigenous and local communities (territories may
include fresh and marine waters (e.g. sea and sea-bed tenure)

The Advisory Group to Article 8 (j)
CBD

5. Traditional lands and waters managed or co-managed by indigenous and local
communities such as co-managed protected areas (where indigenous and local
communities may be able to exercise traditional ecological knowledge on
managing lands and waters traditionally occupied by them)
6. Proportion of Population with secure access to land and to traditional resource
rights
7. Loss of traditional lands and waters
8. Enforced protection of lands from illegal encroachment

Suggested Indicators for exploration

9. Extent of privatization
10. Government expropriation, forced resettlement
Agricultural changes and gender
11. Change in women’s decision making capacity at household level;

IFAD

12. Change in women’s participation in decision making at project/local level.
13.Proportion of female-headed households/other vulnerable groups with legal
title to agriculture land

HRI/MC 11 May 2006

14. Changes in women’s traditional resource access rights

Suggested indicator for exploration

81

Suggested Indicator

Source

2. ABUNDANCE, SCARCITY AND/OR THREATS TO TRADITIONAL SEEDS, PLANT MEDICINES AND
FOOD ANIMALS
Local Knowledge of Bio and Agrobiodiversity
1. Number of government/local policies/programs to transmit/learn indigenous
ecological and agro-ecological knowledge

UNPFII 5 Indicators (2006); The
Advisory Group to Article 8 (j) CBD;
United Nations University (2005)

2. Percent of Indigenous Peoples that participate in traditional vs.non-traditional
economic activities

UNPFII 5 Indicators (2006)

3. Status and trends of linguistic diversity and numbers of speakers of indigenous
languages (as a proxy for traditional knowledge) (nb: Other indicators of the status
of indigenous and traditional knowledge are being developed).

CBD 2010 Biodiversity Indicators
Partnership Project

4. Traditional knowledge associated with species

Conservation and Sustainable Use of
Agricultural Biodiversity: A
Sourcebook (CIP-UPWARD 2003)

5. Distribution of knowledge about a species across different sectors of the
community and transmitted across generations
6. Knowledge of hunting and fishing techniques

Tchoumba 2005

7. Total number of different species used in the household/unit time

Reyes-García et al (2006)

8. Self-reported number of plant-made items that people report knowing how to
make
9. Education systems that encourage use of local ecological knowledge

Suggested indicator for exploration

Introduced and Genetically Modified Seeds
10. Yield of traditional crops and yield of introduced or GMO crops

IFAD

11. Consumption of traditional vs. introduced crops
12. Prices of traditional vs. introduced crops
13. Number of different traditional cultivars of species preferred for distinct uses

CIP-UPWARD (2003)

Habitat Loss through Land Conversion (i.e. monocultures) and Environmental Degradation
14. Number of endangered flora and fauna linked to Indigenous Peoples’ current
and future subsistence needs, and dependence based upon ceremonial and cultural
practices

UNPFII 5 Indicators (2006)

15. Number of fish, animals and other life-forms that can be sustainably hunted,
fished and gathered on lands and territories
16. Threats to viability of resources (climate change, contaminate levels, habitat

82

Suggested Indicator

Source

destruction/conversion)
17. Level/sources of protection of traditional habitat
18. Indigenous Peoples’ inclusion, participation and employment in ecosystem
management
19. Number of preventive programs, regulations, ordinances and measures
protecting Indigenous lands from extractive activities and other non-sustainable
activities
20. Number of environmental protection violations and reports of conservation
damage within and near Indigenous lands and territories
21. Extent of changing Land-use patterns (i.e. territories where traditional land use
has changed to other uses i.e. forest clearance to agriculture; could possibly be
measured by the Global Information Satellite systems (GIS)

The Advisory Group to Article 8 (j)
CBD; ECLAC Indicator Worksheet 4

22. Intensity of fertilizer, insecticide and/or herbicide use by area of agriculture
land

ECLAC Indicator Worksheet 4

Market Expansion
23. Percent of Indigenous Peoples that participate in modern/non-traditional
economic activities

UNPFII 5 Indicators

24. Percent of Indigenous community economy generated through traditional
subsistence activities
25. Capacity (i.e, access to markets) to sell local products

IFAD; Tchoumba (2005)

26. Use of traditional exchange and reciprocity systems

Suggested indicator for exploration

3. CHANGES IN THE USE OF TRADITIONAL FOODS AND MEDICINES (AND ASSOCIATED
CEREMONIAL USES)
1. Change in production and consumption of staples

IFAD

2. Change in number of species used for medicines and frequency of use
3. Change in number of species used as food and frequency of use
4. EXTENT OF CONTINUED PRACTICE/USE OF CEREMONIES, DANCES, PRAYERS, SONGS AND
OTHER ORAL TRADITIONS RELATED TO THE USE OF TRADITIONAL FOODS AND SUBSISTENCE
PRACTICES
1. Degree to which people are engaged in traditional practices: participation in and
knowledge of traditional spiritual ceremonies related to food

Registered Indian HDI; CIPUPWARD 2003; Working Group on
Article 8j. CBD; Maputo Task Force,
Laaksonen et al (2005

2. The existence of totems (indicating totemic diversity)

Advisory Group to Article 8 (j) CBD

83

Suggested Indicator

Source

3. Religious and folk festivals

UNESCO (2000)

4. Societal respect for basic human freedoms of belief, thought and expression

Cultural Freedom and Creative
Empowerment Indices (UNRISD)

5. Societal encouragement for innovative expression

5. PRESERVATION AND CONTINUED USE OF LANGUAGE, SONGS, STORIES AND CEREMONIES,
TRADITIONAL NAMES FOR FOODS AND AGRO ECOLOGICAL PROCESSES
1. Number of speakers of mother tongue (indigenous languages)

CBD 2010 Indicators; UNESCO
(2000)

2. Development of community media in local languages

The Maputo Task Force, Laaksonen
et al (2005)

3. Officialisation of indigenous national languages
4. Percent of children learning indigenous languages

UNPFII 5 (2006)

5. Extent to which indigenous language is used for naming species and ecosystem
features

Suggested indicators for exploration

6. Extent to which indigenous language forms the basis of songs and stories,
frequency of use and means of transmission of songs and stories
6. THE USE OF SACRED SITES FOR ASSOCIATED CEREMONIAL PURPOSES
1. Recognition of sacred sites by local communities, governments, development
industries

The Maputo Task Force Laaksonen
(2005)

2. Level of access/activity (wood gathering, cultivation, etc) in sacred forests

Suggested indicators for exploration

3. Biodiversity in sacred forests
7. RATE OF RURAL TO URBAN MIGRATION AND IMPACT ON TRADITIONAL FOOD SYSTEMS
1. Demographics and statistics on the urbanization and movement/s of indigenous
and local communities away from traditional territories.

The Advisory Group to Article 8 (j)
CBD; UNPFII 5 (2006)

2. Number of households that report income from sources outside the community

Suggested indicators for exploration

3. Household income and use of non-traditional, purchased foods
4. Gender ratio in households and level of agricultural workload on women
5. Level of traditional ecological and agro-ecological knowledge of returned
migrant workers
6, Migrant investments in maintenance of the natural resource base for food

84

Suggested Indicator

Source

production and collection

8. NUMBER AND EFFECTIVENESS OF CONSULTATIONS FOR PLANNING, IMPLEMENTATION AND
EVALUATION; USE OF THE PRINCIPLE OF FREE, PRIOR INFORMED CONSENT (PIC) AND THE
EXTENT TO WHICH CULTURAL CONCERNS ARE CONSIDERED AND ADDRESSED
Intellectual Property Rights
1. Level of knowledge and awareness of IPR among community members

Suggested indicators for exploration

2. Protection mechanisms in place for traditional knowledge and innovation
Access and Benefit Sharing
3. Support for indigenous capacity, leadership, policy and program development
by state and indigenous governance, including number of programs and persons
participating in and completing trainings

UNPFII 5 (2006)

4. Participation in the creation of protected areas and management of forest
concessions.

Tchoumba (2005)

5. Number of development programs that involve collaborative partnerships with
participating community (co-management)

Suggested indicators for exploration

6. Number of development activities that include Free, Prior and Informed
Consent
7. Legislation to regulate access to genetic resources and benefit sharing
9. INDIGENOUS INSTITUTIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE TRANSMISSION
1. Existence of knowledge holders and the persistence of customary law

The Advisory Group to Article 8 (j)
CBD; UNPFII 5 (2006)

2. The establishment and effective implementation of local/government
policies/programmes for traditional knowledge retention, use and
intergenerational transfer and their effective implementation (see area 1)
3. Level of involvement of youth and elders in community decision-making

Registered Indian HDI

4. Legal framework for local level institutions

Suggested indicators for exploration

5. Extent of use of traditional ecological and agro-ecological knowledge in formal
institutions at higher scales
10. RESILIENCE

85

Suggested Indicator

Source

1. The extent of acquired local knowledge of the relationship between changing
ecological conditions and the impact on traditional foods and agro-ecological
system;

Suggested indicators for exploration

2. Locally developed food production and procurement strategies for adapting to
changing ecological conditions
3. Labor availability and market prices

86

Appendix table 2: Indicator areas developed at the 2nd Global Consultation on the Right to Food
and Food Security for Indigenous Peoples: Cultural Indicators for Food Security, Food
Sovereignty and Sustainable Development
1. ACCESS TO, SECURITY FOR AND INTEGRITY OF LANDS, TERRITORIES AND NATURAL
RESOURCES FOR TRADITIONAL FOOD PRODUCTION, HARVESTING AND/OR GATHERING
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Number of policies,
programs, legislative and
administrative measures
(national, state, local/tribal
and/or international ) in place for
the management, protection and
conservation of lands, territories
and subsistence resources used
traditionally by Indigenous
Peoples

1. Number of policies, programs,
legislative and administrative measures
(national, state, local/tribal and/or
international) being effectively
implemented for the management,
protection and conservation of lands,
territories and subsistence resources used
traditionally by Indigenous Peoples.

1. Percentage of lands, territories and
subsistence resources used traditionally
by Indigenous Peoples for subsistence
and food production to which IPs still
have full access.

2. Number of national
constitutional provisions, laws,
policies and programs which
support of Indigenous Peoples’
access to and legal recognition
of lands, territories, and natural
resources which they have
traditionally owned, occupied or
otherwise used for subsistence
and food production and
practices.

2. Number of programs in place or under
development to demarcate Indigenous
Peoples’ traditional lands, territories
and/or subsistence use areas.

2. Percentage of Indigenous Peoples’
lands and territories that are legally
demarcated, recognized, owned and/or
controlled by them today as compared to
benchmarks established in past (i.e.lands
recognized in Treaties and agreements,
original/traditional use areas.)

3. Number of policies, programs,
legislative and administrative
measures in place (National,
state, local/tribal and/or
international) which restrict or
limit Indigenous Peoples’ use of
and access to lands, territories
and subsistence resources used
traditionally.

3. Number of court cases or legal
challenges to measures, policies or
programs which restrict or limit
Indigenous Peoples’ use of and access to
lands, territories and subsistence
resources used traditionally.

3. Percentage of lands, territories and
natural resources used traditionally for
food production (farming, fishing,
hunting, gathering, herding) currently
being used by Indigenous Peoples
compared to benchmarks established in
the past (5, 10, or 20 years etc)

4. Number of laws, instruments,
Treaties and ordinances in place
which respect and uphold
Indigenous Peoples’ right to use,
protect, control own and/or
develop traditional subsistence
food resources (plants, animals,
seeds, genetic resources, etc) and
prevent the misappropriation of
Indigenous Peoples’ collective
bio-cultural heritage.

4.Degree of enforcement and compliance
with Laws, Constitutions, Treaties,
Agreements, Constructive Arrangements,
ordinances and other Policies upholding
and defending Indigenous Peoples’ right
to use, protect, control own and/or
develop traditional subsistence food
resources (plants, animals, seeds, genetic
resources etc) and prevent the
misappropriation of Indigenous Peoples’
collective bio-cultural heritage.

4. Percentage of traditional use lands,
territories, and subsistence use areas
which have retained their productive
capacity for
farming/fishing/hunting/gathering/herdin
g); Percentage which are now damaged,
diminished, contaminated, etc.

87

5. Number of mechanisms in
place with agreement of
Indigenous Peoples for resolving
conflicts regarding lands,
territories and resources used
traditionally for subsistence and
food production by Indigenous
Peoples.

5. Frequency of conflict over territory and
natural resources, number of court cases
and disputes filed.

5. Percentage of conflicts settled in favor
of Indigenous Peoples.

2. ABUNDANCE, SCARCITY AND/OR THREATS TO TRADITIONAL SEEDS, PLANT FOODS AND
MEDICINES, AND FOOD ANIMALS, AS WELL AS CULTURAL PRACTICES ASSOCIATED WITH THEIR
PROTECTION AND SURVIVAL
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Number of traditional
institutions or other mechanisms
or programs in place for
transmission of traditional
knowledge about cultural
practices related to food
production, use, protection
and/or abundance.

1.Number of investigations and studies
re: abundance and health of traditional
subsistence foods being carried out by
Indigenous Peoples’.

1. Percentage of traditional knowledge
and cultural practices associated with the
use, production, protection and
abundance of traditional food sources and
resources still being used on a regular
basis as compared to benchmarks from
the past.

2. Number of programs and
projects in place in communities
for clean up of contaminated
habitats; Percentage which are
initiated/run/lead/evaluated by
Indigenous community
members.

2. Number of active programs in
Indigenous communities to restore plant
or animal food species and/or their
habitats and measure the impacts on
abundance since their implementation.

2. Percentage of traditional subsistence
food resources (plant and animal) which
are intact, viable, productive, healthy and
free from contamination (toxics, GMO’s
etc) compared to percentage of
subsistence plants and animals that show
signs of disease, toxic contamination,
diminishing population and other effects.

3. Number of government,
corporate, agency, NGO or other
outside entity programmes in
place for clean up and
restoration of contaminated or
impacted habitats.

3. Number of studies initiated by
Indigenous communities and/or outside
agencies to compare traditional food use
levels with diet related disease levels,
suicide rates and other physical, mental or
social illness or factors.

3. Changes in monthly/yearly harvests of
food plants and animals used traditionally
and reasons for any decrease, changes
and/or restrictions.

4. Numbers of studies or assessments by
Indigenous communities and others in
conjunction with Indigenous Peoples to
assess impacts of imposed development
(dams, deforestation, urbanization,
industrial agricultural, mining, drilling,
etc.) on the traditional lands, territories
and subsistence resources of Indigenous
Peoples.

4. Number of traditional food plants and
animals which have been declared
endangered, have decreased in numbers,
and/or have disappeared (suggested
comparisons to 50 years and 10 years
ago, as per reports of subsistence users as
well as existing governmental, agency,
organization studies); number considered
to be currently under threat.
5. Levels of introduced environmental
contaminants (i.e.mercury, POPs,
pesticides and other agro-chemicals,
genetic contaminants etc.) present in

88

traditional subsistence foods including
breast milk.
3. CONSUMPTION AND PREPARATION OF TRADITIONAL PLANT AND ANIMAL FOODS AND
MEDICINES, INCLUDING IN CEREMONIAL/CULTURAL USE AS WELL AS DAILY HOUSEHOLD USE
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Number of programs in operation
providing education to community
members about health, nutritional benefits
as well as cultural significance of
traditional foods.

1. Percentage of households in a
community that use traditional/
subsistence foods on a regular basis,
compared to an agreed upon number of
years in the past (5, 10 or 25 depending
on community history); Percentage of
household diet based on traditional foods
(weekly, monthly and over a year) as
compared to “introduced” foods (i.e.
processed foods, imported foods, GMO’s
etc.).

2. Number of such programs initiated by
groups/agencies from outside the
community vs number which are
community-initiated and community lead.

2. Percentage of community members
and/or families which still participate in
traditional subsistence activities
(compared to 50 years ago, 10 years ago
or another appropriate number of years to
determine rates of increase or decrease).
3. Percentage of foods and food related
items used traditionally in ceremonies
which are still in use today as compared
to an agreed upon number of years in the
past (5, 10 or 25 depending on
community history).

4. CONTINUED PRACTICE AND USE OF CEREMONIES, DANCES, PRAYERS, SONGS AND STORIES AND
OTHER CULTURAL TRADITIONS RELATED TO THE USE OF TRADITIONAL FOODS AND
SUBSISTENCE PRACTICES
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

1. Number of traditional
institutions/societies/leaders that
initiate/take responsibility for
traditional ceremonies and for
religious activities related to or
using traditional food (planting,
harvesting, caretaking,
gathering, hunting, fishing,
preparation and serving).

1. Percentage of women, youth, men and
elders that participate in the transfer of
knowledge through traditional ceremonies
and religious activities related to or using
traditional food (planting, harvesting,
caretaking, gathering, hunting, fishing,
preparation and serving).

2. Number of contemporary
institutions that provide
for/support the continuation of
these traditional ceremonies and

Results Indicator Areas
1. Number / Percentage of community
members who participate in traditional
ceremonies and cultural practices;
percentage of those who are youth.

2. Number of traditional and cultural
practices associated with the use,
protection and abundance of traditional
food sources and resources still being
used on a regular basis (i.e. songs,

89

cultural activities.

ceremonies, stories, dances, clan
relationships and other practices).

3. Number of traditional
institutions in place to insure
transmission of traditional
knowledge about
cultural/ceremonial practices
specifically related to food
production, use, protection and/
or abundance, and the use of
traditional foods in these
practices.

3. Number or percentage of community
members who actively participate in these
cultural and practices.

5. PRESERVATION AND CONTINUED USE OF LANGUAGE AND TRADITIONAL NAMES FOR FOODS
AND PROCESSES (PLANTING, HUNTING, GATHERING, HARVESTING, FISHING, FOOD PREPARATION
ETC.)
Structural Indicator Areas
1. Number of traditional
institutions/societies/leaders
that take responsibility for the
continuation of the traditional
language, songs stories, etc
related to traditional food use
(planting, harvesting,
caretaking, gathering, hunting,
fishing, preparation and
serving).

Process Indicator Areas
1. Percentage of youth who actively
participate in programs to learn the
traditional language including names for
traditional foods and food related
practices.

2. Number of contemporary
institutions that provide
for/support the continuation of
the traditional language, songs
stories, etc related to traditional
food use.

Results Indicator Areas
1. Percentage of living community
members who know the words, songs,
dances, stories associated with traditional
food gathering/production/caretaking
preparation and use.

2. Percentage of community members
who are fluent speakers in the Indigenous
language and percentage of households
in which an Indigenous language is the
primary spoken language, and increase or
decrease compared to number of years in
the past (i.e. 10 years or 25 years).

6. INTEGRITY OF AND ACCESS TO SACRED SITES FOR CEREMONIAL PURPOSES RELATED TO USE
OF TRADITIONAL FOODS
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Percentage of sites
traditionally used for
ceremonial, religious and related
traditional subsistence activities
currently under recognized
Indigenous ownership, control,
jurisdiction and /or protection.

1. Percentage of programs in place to
return use/control/ownership/jurisdiction
of these sites to Indigenous Peoples.

1. Percentage of total sites traditionally
used for ceremonial, religious and related
traditional subsistence activities within
traditional lands and territories which are
currently used on a regular basis
compared to benchmarks established in
the past (traditional use, Treaties, number
of years ago, etc)

2. Percentage of these under
other legal forms of protection

2. Percentage of total sites traditionally
used for ceremonial, religious and

90

(i.e. federal/state) and/or as
protected areas.

traditional subsistence activities within
currently-recognized Indigenous
territories which are now used on a
regular basis.

3. Percentage of sites under
state/federal protection and/or
protected areas designation to
which Indigenous Peoples have
full access.

3. Percentage of these sites currently
under threat of
desecration/destruction/contamination
etc.

4. Number of mechanisms in
place with full participation and
agreement of Indigenous Peoples
for resolving conflicts regarding
access to/control and use
of/protection of sacred sites.

4. Percent of conflicts settled in favor of
Indigenous Peoples.

7. MIGRATION AND MOVEMENT AWAY FROM TRADITIONAL LANDS AS A RESULT OF RURAL-TOURBAN MIGRATION, CONFLICT, FORCED RELOCATION, LAND APPROPRIATION, CLIMATE
CHANGE, AND ECONOMIC NECESSITY; RETURN PATTERNS AND RELATIONSHIPS TO CONTINUED
USE OF TRADITIONAL FOODS
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Number of laws/agreements
in place providing for and
enabling the free movement and
return of traditionally mobile
Peoples and for mobile
subsistence practices (herding,
fishing, hunting, gathering).

1. Number of laws enforced and
implemented providing for the free
movement and return of traditionally
mobile Peoples and for mobile
subsistence practices (herding, fishing,
hunting, gathering).

1. Percentage of persons/youth that leave
the community on a seasonal, semipermanently (for at least 2 years ) or
permanently (5 years of more) for
employment/economic or other reasons,
including those which impact traditional
subsistence access or resources.

2. Number of laws/agreements
enabling cross border movement
of Indigenous Peoples including
access to traditional subsistence
use areas.

2. Degree of enforcement of
laws/agreements that exist to allow cross
border mobility for subsistence,
ceremonial and other related purposes.

2. Percentage of those who have returned
to communities who use traditional food
systems and ceremonial practices upon
their return.

3. Percentage of households, and
percentage of youth, that retain or
maintain traditional food use when away
from their home communities.
8. EFFECTIVE CONSULTATIONS FOR PLANNING, IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION APPLYING
THE PRINCIPLES OF FREE, PRIOR INFORMED CONSENT AND FULL PARTICIPATION BY
COMMUNITY MEMBERS WHEN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS ARE IMPLEMENTED BY STATES,
OUTSIDE AGENCIES OR OTHER ENTITIES AND THE EXTENT TO WHICH CULTURAL CONCERNS
ARE CONSIDERED AND ADDRESSED
Structural Indicator Areas
1. Number of laws, legal
systems and mechanisms in

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Number of court cases and complaints
related violations of Peoples’ collective

1. Percent of court cases and complaints
related to Intellectual Property

91

place, recognized and being
implemented (traditional/ tribal/
state/national/ and international)
for the recognition, protection
and restoration of Indigenous
Peoples’ collective knowledge
systems related to traditional
foods and medicines (i.e.
Intellectual Property
Rights/Cultural Heritage rights)
including the protection of
genetic resources.

knowledge systems/Intellectual Property
Rights filed by Indigenous Peoples
(symbols, genetic resources, seeds and
plants, including medicinal plants, etc).

Rights/Cultural heritage rights settled in
favour of the Indigenous Peoples.

2. Number of Indigenous
Peoples-initiated programs in
place to validate, organize,
protect and/or register their
traditional knowledge systems
and resist/oppose/prevent
misappropriation of their
collective bio-cultural heritage.

2. Number of consultations for program
planning, implementation and evaluation
with community members and
representatives by states, outside agencies
or other entities; Percentage of
community members including elders/
traditional subsistence
practitioners/traditional food
producers/knowledge holders/ users
participating in these consultations.

2. Extent to which the definition,
understanding and priorities for
“Development” by the Indigenous
Peoples affected is considered and
reflected in relevant project planning,
implementation and assessment,
including preservation of traditional food
systems and habitats, based on
assessment of participating community
members.

3. Level of involvement of the affected
local communities/community members
in all studies and evaluations relating to
traditional food production and
use/subsistence resources and practices
carried out in and near their lands and
traditional use areas.

3. Extent to which development
projects/proposals from outside the
Indigenous communities respect and
uphold the rights of Free Prior Informed
Consent and Self-determination as
defined and assessed by impacted
community members including traditional
subsistence producers/users.

4. Level of participation in and control of
programs and projects by the community
members, including traditional
subsistence and food producers, cultural
leaders, and elders in the territories where
they are being undertaken.
9. EXISTENCE AND VIABILITY OF MECHANISMS AND INSTITUTIONS CREATED BY AND
ACCESSIBLE TO INDIGENOUS PEOPLES FOR TRANSMISSION OF FOOD RELATED TRADITIONAL
KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICES TO FUTURE GENERATIONS
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

1. Number of public policies
and mechanisms that hold
government and other interests
accountable and responsible to
Indigenous Peoples’ interests in
this area.

1. Number of programmes and
institutional mechanisms existing, led and
controlled by indigenous communities
(using new and/or traditional knowledge
transmission methods) to record and
transmit traditional knowledge about food
and subsistence practices.

Results Indicator Areas
1. Number of youth, women, elders and
other community members involved in
and benefiting from these programmes.

92

2. Number of government laws,
programmes and policies in
place and being implemented
that support and recognize
Indigenous Peoples’ rights to
maintain and transmit their
traditional knowledge, and make
decisions in that regard.

2. Level of community access to and
availability of new technologies for
knowledge documentation and
transmission.

3. Extent to which Indigenous
Peoples have control over local
educational systems and schools,
and utilize these systems to
transmit knowledge related to
traditional food production and
use and related cultural
practices.

2. Number of Indigenous Peoples and/or
institutions, including Indigenous youth,
who use new communication
Technologies and knowledge
transmission methods to transmit and
refer to Indigenous knowledge about
traditional foods, threats to Indigenous
Peoples’ traditional foods and related
cultural practices, and/or to organize
support for and protection of traditional
Indigenous food systems.
3. Number or percent of Indigenous
youth in a community/tribe/nation who
perceive their traditional foods and
subsistence practices as relevant in
today’s world (dynamic, vibrant, essential
for success, cultural identity, health,
survival).

10. CAPACITY WITHIN INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES AND PEOPLES FOR ADAPTABILITY,
RESILIENCE, RESISTANCE AND/OR RESTORATION OF TRADITIONAL FOOD USE AND PRODUCTION
IN RESPONSE TO CHANGING ECONOMIC, POLITICAL AND/ OR ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
Structural Indicator Areas
1. Number of community run
programs for the reestablishment of lost or
threatened food sources,
practices and/or knowledge,
(including addressing
adaptation to changing
environmental, political,
cultural and/or economic
conditions).

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Existence of and extent of participation
in community-based discussions and
decision-making regarding the need
and/or desirability for adapting of
traditional methods and food sources to
changing conditions, including level of
participation by elders, youth, cultural
leaders, women and traditional
practitioners.

1. Percent of Indigenous community
members that continue to use and produce
traditional foods in their territories while
adapting to changing conditions
(migration, environmental changes, etc.).

2. Number of new culturally and
environmentally sustainable technologies
or methods in use or under development
for food production or related activities
(i.e. sustainable energy production, water
purification, irrigation, natural pest
control etc.) with the agreement and
involvement of local practitioners.

2. Number of Indigenous food traditions
and resources that have resisted, adapted,
and/or have been reincorporated in new
situations and places, (new locations and
residences, intercultural marriages, in
response to impacts of climate changes
etc.) in ways that are consistent with
Indigenous cultural integrity and wellbeing as defined by the practitioners.

3. Number of studies or assessments
carried out by or involving community

3. Number of different Indigenousgenerated income-earning activities

93

members to assess impacts of new
technologies and methods for food
production/use on traditional cultural
integrity, health, traditional food
restoration capacities and other factors
(either undermining or enhancing).

associated with traditional foods, agroecological and native food systems,
knowledge and practices.

11. ABILITY OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES TO UTILIZE AND IMPLEMENT RECOGNIZED RIGHTS, LEGAL
NORMS AND STANDARDS AS WELL AS SELF-GOVERNMENT STRUCTURES TO PROMOTE AND
DEFEND THEIR FOOD SOVEREIGNTY ON THE LOCAL/TRIBAL/COMMUNITY, NATIONAL AND
INTERNATIONAL LEVELS
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Existence/number of public
policies, institutions, Treaties,
agreements and laws which
respect and support indigenous
self-determination, autonomy
and food sovereignty at all
levels.

1. Number of public policies, institutions,
Treaties, agreements and laws being
effectively and actively implemented
which respect and support Indigenous
self-determination, autonomy and food
sovereignty at all levels (local/tribal,
national and international levels).

1. Number of Indigenous Peoples
(individuals and communities) that know,
implement, benefit from and have
appropriated the right to food and food
sovereignty in keeping with their diverse
realities and self-determination.

2. Number of related
government institutions with
programmes and budgets
(including national budgets) that
are dedicated
specifically/exclusively to
Indigenous Peoples.

2. Number of programmes in Indigenous
communities to inform and assist
community members, leaders and
practitioners to know their rights and
available mechanisms/processes to assert
these rights numbers of participants
(general and also specific to women,
youth and elders).

2. Number of Indigenous community
members, including community leaders,
who understand the relationship between
rights to self determination/self
government/ sovereignty/autonomy, food
sovereignty/food security and community
health and well being.

3. Number and effectiveness of
mechanisms for prevention of
and redress for denial of rights to
food, food sovereignty and
subsistence rights at all levels
(tribal/local/state/national/International).

3. Number of legal cases/complaints filed
by Indigenous Peoples to prevent and/or
halt activities that threaten or undermine
their food sovereignty; final outcomes of
these cases /complaints (percentage
decided for or against Indigenous
Peoples’ interests).

3. Number of Indigenous communities
who practice food sovereignty through
self-government structures and assertions
of their rights using a variety of
mechanisms.

4. Number of existing
ordinances and laws passed by
Indigenous Peoples’ own
governing bodies and leadership
institutions related to protection
of food sovereignty, food
producing lands, territories and
resources; number of
national/state/provincial laws
that support and/or undermine
these tribal ordinances and laws.

94

Appendix table 3: Consolidated indicators developed at the 2nd Global Consultation on the
Right to Food and Food Security for Indigenous Peoples: Cultural Indicators for Food Security,
Food Sovereignty and Sustainable Development
1. Access to, security for and integrity of lands, territories, natural resources, sacred sites and ceremonial
areas used for traditional food production, harvesting and/or gathering and related cultural and
ceremonial purposes
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Number of constitutional
provisions, policies, programs,
legislative and administrative
measures (national, state, local/tribal
and/or international) in place for
demarcation, legal recognition,
management, protection and
conservation of lands, territories,
subsistence resources, ceremonial
areas and sacred sites used
traditionally by Indigenous Peoples.

1. Number of constitutional provisions,
policies, programs, legislative and
administrative measures (national, state,
local/tribal and/or international) being
effectively implemented for the
demarcation, legal recognition
management, protection and conservation
of lands, territories, subsistence resources,
sacred sites and ceremonial areas used
traditionally by Indigenous Peoples.

1. Percentage of lands, territories
subsistence resources, sacred sites and
ceremonial areas used traditionally by
Indigenous Peoples for subsistence and
food production to which IPs still have
full access and/or control, and are
legally demarcated or otherwise
recognized today as compared to
benchmarks established in the past (i.e.
lands recognized in treaties and
agreements, original/traditional use
areas).

2. Number of policies, programs,
legislative, administrative measures
and legal mechanisms in place
(national, state, local/tribal and/or
international) which restrict, limit,
respect or uphold Indigenous
Peoples’ use of and access to lands,
territories, subsistence resources,
sacred sites and ceremonial areas
used traditionally.

2. Number of court cases or legal
challenges to measures, policies or
programs which restrict or limit
Indigenous Peoples’ use of and access to
lands, territories, subsistence resources,
sacred sites and ceremonial areas used
traditionally and percentage of conflicts
settled in favor of Indigenous Peoples.

2. Percentage of lands, territories and
subsistence resources used
traditionally for food production
(farming, fishing, hunting, gathering,
herding) and related ceremonial uses
currently being used by Indigenous
Peoples compared to benchmarks
established in the past (5, 10, or 20
years etc); Percentage which have
retained their full productive capacity
vs. percentage which are now damaged,
diminished, contaminated, etc.

2. Abundance, scarcity and/or threats to traditional seeds, plant foods and medicines, and food animals, as
well as cultural practices associated with their protection and survival
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Number of programs and projects
in place in communities for clean up
and restoration of impacted habitats
and/or restoration of plant or animal
food species by government,
corporate, agency, NGO or other
outside entity programmes; number
of such programmes which are
initiated, run and/or evaluated by
Indigenous community members

1. Number of investigations and studies
on abundance and health of traditional
subsistence foods based on changes in
monthly/yearly harvests of food plants
and animals used traditionally and
reasons for any changes; number of
programs/policies initiated as a result and
percentage of those carried out by
Indigenous Peoples and communities.

1. Percent of traditional cultural
practices associated with the use,
production, protection and abundance
of traditional food sources and
resources still being used on a regular
basis as compared to benchmarks from
the past.

2. Number of community-initiated
and community lead programs or

2. Number of studies initiated by
Indigenous communities and/or outside

2. Percentage of traditional subsistence
food resources (plant and animal) and

95

other initiatives in operation to
provide education about the current
threats to subsistence practices and
resources (environmental
contamination, habitat destruction,
loss of traditional knowledge and
Indigenous language,
misappropriation and misuse of
biological resources, genetic
modification, etc.)

agencies to compare access to traditional
foods, abundance and/or scarcity with
diet related diseases (diabetes,
malnutrition, infant mortality, maternal
health, obesity, suicide rates and other
physical, mental or social illness or
factors.)

habitats which are intact, viable,
productive, healthy and free from
contamination (toxics, GMO’s etc)
compared to percentage of subsistence
plants and animals that show signs of
disease, toxic contamination,
diminishing population based on
changes in monthly/yearly harvests and
other affects.

3. Number of laws, ordinances and
provisions in place to protect
traditionally used subsistence plant
and animals and their habitats from
overuse, environmental destruction,
misappropriation, contamination etc;
Percentage that have been developed
and are being implemented by and/or
in conjunction with Indigenous
Peoples.

3. Numbers of studies or assessments by
Indigenous communities and others in
conjunction with Indigenous Peoples to
assess impacts of imposed development
(dams, deforestation, urbanization,
industrial agriculture, mining, drilling,
etc.) and introduced environmental
contaminants (i.e. mercury, POPs,
pesticides and other agro-chemicals,
genetic contaminants etc.) on traditional
subsistence foods including breast milk.

3. Number of traditional food plants
and animals which have been declared
endangered, have decreased in
numbers, and/or have disappeared
(suggested comparisons to 50 years and
10 years ago, as per reports of
subsistence users as well as existing
governmental, agency and outside
organization studies); number
considered to be under current threat.

3. Use and transmission of methods, knowledge language, ceremonies, dances, prayers, oral histories,
stories and songs related to traditional foods and subsistence practices, and the continued use of traditional
foods in daily diet as well as in relevant cultural/ceremonial practices
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Number of traditional institutions
or other mechanisms or programs in
place for transmitting traditional
knowledge, languages and cultural
practices related to food production,
use, protection, preparation and/or
abundance.

1. Number of youth, women, elders and
other community members involved in
and benefiting from these programs to
record and transmit traditional knowledge
about food and subsistence practices.

1. Percentage of community
households which use traditional/
subsistence foods as a regular part of
their diet, compared to an agreed upon
number of years in the past (5, 10 or 25
depending on community history);
Percentage of total household diets
based on traditional foods (weekly,
monthly and over a year) as compared
to “introduced” foods (i.e. processed
foods, imported foods, GMO’s etc.)

2. Number of programs and
institutional mechanisms existing, led
and controlled by indigenous
communities (using new and/or
traditional knowledge transmission
methods) to record and transmit
traditional knowledge about
traditional food production and
subsistence activities and related
cultural knowledge and practices.

2. Number of community-initiated and
community lead programs or other
initiatives in operation to provide
education about the nutritional value,
heath benefits and cultural significance of
traditional foods, and culturally relevant
and environmentally sustainable food
production methods; number of such
programs in operation initiated by
groups/agencies from outside the
community.

2. Percentage of community members
who know traditional methods for food
gathering/production/preparation
including the traditional language,
songs, dances, stories and ceremonies
associated with these practices
traditional; Percentage of community
members which participate in and use
these practices and percentage of those
who are youth.

3. Number of government laws,

3. Number or percent of indigenous

3. Percentage of foods and food related

96

programs and policies in place and
being implemented that support and
recognize Indigenous Peoples’ rights
to maintain, protect and transmit their
traditional knowledge, control their
educational systems and make other
decisions in that regard.

youth in a community/tribe/nation who
perceive or express that their traditional
foods and subsistence practices as
relevant in today’s world (dynamic,
vibrant, essential for success, cultural
identity, health, survival).

items used traditionally in ceremonies
which are still in use today as
compared to an agreed upon number of
years in the past (5, 10 or 25,
depending on community history).

4. Capacity by Indigenous Peoples for adaptability, resilience, and/or restoration of traditional food use
and production in response to changing conditions including migration, displacement, urbanization and
environmental changes
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Number of community run
programs for reestablishment of lost
or threatened food sources, practices
and/or knowledge (including
adaptation to changing
environmental, political, cultural
and/or economic conditions).

1. Existence of and extent of participation
in community-based discussions and
decision-making regarding the need
and/or desirability for adapting traditional
methods and food sources to changing
conditions, including level of
participation by elders, youth, cultural
leaders, women and traditional
practitioners.

1. Percent of Indigenous community
members that continue to use and
produce traditional foods in their
territories while adapting to changing
conditions (migration, environmental
changes, etc.).

2. Number of laws/agreements in
place providing for and enabling the
free movement and return of
traditionally mobile Peoples and for
mobile subsistence practices
(herding, fishing, hunting, gathering)
including across international
borders.

2. Number of new culturally and
environmentally sustainable technologies
or methods in use or under development
for food production or related activities
(i.e. sustainable energy production, water
purification, irrigation, natural pest
control etc.) with the agreement and
involvement of local practitioners and
number of studies or assessments carried
out by or involving community members
to assess impacts of these new
technologies and methods.

2. Percentage of persons/youth that
leave the community on a seasonal,
semi-permanent (for at least 2 years )
or permanent (5 years of more) basis
for employment/economic/subsistence
or other reasons; of those who return to
the communities, what percentage go
back to using traditional food systems
and related ceremonial/cultural
practices.

3. Number of Indigenous Peoples and/or
institutions, including indigenous youth,
who use new communication
technologies and knowledge transmission
methods to transmit and refer to
indigenous knowledge about traditional
foods, threats to Indigenous Peoples’
traditional foods and related cultural
practices, and/or to organize support for
and protection of traditional indigenous
food systems.

3. Number of indigenous food
traditions and resources that have
resisted, adapted, and/or has been reincorporated into new situations and
places, (new locations and residences,
intercultural marriages, responding to
impacts of climate changes, adapted as
income-earning activities, etc.) in ways
that are consistent with indigenous
dignity and well-being as defined by
the practitioners.

97

5. Ability of Indigenous Peoples to exercise and implement their rights including self-determination and
free prior informed consent, as well as their self-government structures, to promote and defend their Food
Sovereignty and related aspects of their development
Structural Indicator Areas

Process Indicator Areas

Results Indicator Areas

1. Number of laws, legal systems
and mechanisms in place and being
implemented (traditional/ tribal/
state/national/ and international) for
the recognition, protection, control,
ownership, restoration and/or redress
of violations of Indigenous Peoples’
collective knowledge systems and
bio-cultural heritage, and other
aspects of their right to food and food
sovereignty.

1. Number of court cases and complaints
filed to prevent and/or redress violations
of Indigenous Peoples’ rights to their
collective knowledge systems and biocultural heritage (symbols, genetic
resources, seeds and plants, including
medicinal plants, etc.), to halt proposed
non-sustainable development projects or
to otherwise defend their food
sovereignty; percent of those settled in
favour of Indigenous Peoples.

Number of Indigenous communities
who practice food sovereignty through
self-government structures and
assertions of their rights using a variety
of mechanisms.

2. Number of public policies,
institutions, treaties, agreements and
laws in existence which respect and
support Indigenous Peoples’ rights to
self-determination, free prior
informed consent, autonomy, food
sovereignty and right to subsistence
at all levels; number/percent being
effectively implemented and number
being violated .

2. Number of consultations for program
planning, implementation and evaluation
with community members and
representatives by states, outside agencies
or other entities; Percentage of
community members including elders/
traditional subsistence
practitioners/traditional food
producers/knowledge holders/ users
participating in and/or taking a leadership
role these consultations and resulting
activities and programs.

2. Number of development
projects/proposals from outside
Indigenous communities that respect
and uphold the rights of free prior
informed consent, self-determination
and development as defined and
assessed by impacted community
members including traditional
subsistence producers/users.

3. Number of ordinances and laws
passed by Indigenous Peoples’ own
governing bodies and leadership
institutions related to protection of
food sovereignty, food producing
lands, territories and resources;
number of national/state/provincial
laws and programmes (including
those providing financial assistance
to communities) that support and/or
undermine the implementation of
these tribal/Indigenous community
ordinances and laws.

3. Number of programmes in Indigenous
communities to inform and assist
community members, leaders and
practitioners to know their rights and
available mechanisms/processes to assert
these rights; Numbers of participants in
these programmes (general and also
specific to women, youth and elders).

3. Number of Indigenous community
members, including community
leaders, who understand the
relationship between their rights to self
determination and self government,
their food sovereignty/food security
and their community health and well
being.

98

Appendix table 4: Indicadores culturales relevantes de Soberania Alimentaria de los Pueblos
Indigenas (experiencia del SNU en Nicaragua) por Galio C. Gurdián, Virgilio Rivera, Marianela
Corriols, Mireille Vijil. Bilwi, Nicaragua, 7 Septiembre 2006.
Indicadores
culturales relevantes
en Soberanía
Alimentaria
Estructural
Territorio

Producción y
Bienes y
Servicios
Ambientales
(BSA)

Proceso

Resultados

1. Acceso e
integridad a las
tierras, aguas y
habitat tradicionales

Existencia del
ordenamiento jurídico
e institucionalidad en
defensa de los
territorios, aguas y
habitat tradicionales
indígenas. En el caso
de Nicaragua Ley 28 y
Ley 445.

Número de
Políticas públicas,
programas,
proyectos,
resoluciones,
ordenanzas para el
cumplimiento del
ordenamiento
jurídico
establecido.

Número de territorios y
tierras indígenas demarcados,
titulados y registrados y
protegidos.

2. Abundancia,
escasez o amenazas a
semillas, plantas
medicinales y
animales de
alimentación
tradicional

Número de Programas
y proyectos de Manejo
y conservación de
ecosistemas lagunares,
cuencas y humedales
en comunidades
indígenas.

Mejorada la calidad
de vida (Índice de
Desarrollo
Humano) en
comunidades
indígenas mediante
el uso sostenibles
del Medio
Ambiente y sus
recursos naturales.

Beneficios directos a las
comunidades por la
utilización sostenible de sus
recursos y la producción de
bienes y servicios
ambientales (BSA).

Número de Programas
y proyectos para el
cumplimiento del
(ODM #1): Promoción
y desarrollo
decapacidades y
recursos locales parala
producción de
alimentos con
municipios indígenas.

Promoción de turismo
comunitario indígena
con indicadores de
sostenibilidad.

Número de políticas,
programas y proyectos

Número de Planes
de desarrollo
municipales que
integran acciones
dirigidas a
garantizar la
soberanía
alimentaria de las
comunidades
indígenas.

Número de
políticas públicas,
programas y
proyectos para el
desarrollo del
turismo

Cumplimiento del ODM#1 y
soberanía alimentaria de
comunidades indígenas al
año 2015.

Número de comunidades
indígenas controlando y
beneficiándose de sus
recursos naturales y
paisajísticos.

Certificación y nominación
de origen de semillas y
material vegetativo de
territorios y comunidades
indígenas.

99

en rescate y desarrollo
de la biodiversidad y
riqueza genética en
territorios indígenas.

Salud

3. La disminución o
aumento en el
consumo y
preparación de
medicinas y
alimentos
tradicionales de
origen animal o
vegetal incluyendo
uso ceremonial y
doméstico cotidiano.

Ordenamiento jurídico
nacional y regional
que reconoce y
legitima la medicina
tradicional y las
terapias alternativas
medicinales indigenas
(AM).

comunitario.
Fortalecimiento de
sistemas
productivos locales
(Conglomerados)
en base a la
biodiversidad y
riqueza genética
autóctona.

4. Grado de
continuidad de
prácticas o uso de
ceremonias, danzas,
oraciones, canciones
y tradiciones orales
utilizando alimentos
tradicionales

Ordenamiento jurídico
e instituciones
nacionales, regionales,
municipales y
comunitarias que
protegen, impulsan y
fortalecen prácticas o
uso de ceremonias,
danzas, oraciones,

Construcción de modelos de
desarrollo humano sostenible
indígena funcionando.

Número de redes
empresariales
comunitarias
existentes.

Modelo de desarrollo
humano sostenible indígena
funcionando.

Inclusión de plantas
medicinales
tradicionales a la
farmacopea
nacional.

Funcionamiento pleno de
Sistemas Regional,
Municipales y Territoriales
de salud que incorporan la
medicina tradicional.

Número de
practicantes,
parteras y médicos
tradicionales
funcionando en
territorios y
comunidades
indígenas.

Instituciones de
Educación formal e
informal
investigando,
sistematizando,
desarrollando y
transmitiendo
saberes y técnicas
sobre medicina
tradicional.
Recreación

Biodiversidad de territorios y
comunidades indígenas
restaurada y protegida.

Montos
Presupuestarios
(Nacional, Regional
y Municipal)
destinados al
fortalecimiento de
actividades
recreativas que
utilizan alimentos

Numero de practicantes,
parteras y médicos
tradicionales formados.

Centros de procesamiento
indígenas produciendo
medicina y distribuyendo
medicinas tradicionales.

# de centros de preparación y
expendio de alimentos
(Escuelas, centros de salud.
comiderias, hoteles,
restaurantes) que utilizan
insumos y recetas
tradicionales.

100

canciones y
tradiciones orales
utilizando alimentos
tradicionales.

tradicionales.

# de Instituciones
de Educación
formal e informal
investigando,
sistematizando,
desarrollando y
transmitiendo
cultura memorias y
practicas
relacionadas
ceremonias, danzas,
oraciones,
canciones y
tradiciones orales
utilizando
alimentos
tradicionales.

# de especialistas
conocedores de la
cultura y alimentos
tradicionales
funcionando en
territorios y
comunidades
indígenas.
Educación

5. Preservación y
continuidad del uso
de idioma, cuentos,
narrativas,
ceremonias, nombres
tradicionales para
alimentos y procesos
(siembra, caza,
recolección, cosecha,
preparación, etc.)

Ordenamiento Jurídico
que reconoce y
legitima educación
intercultural bilingüe y
el rescate de lenguas
indígenas en peligro
de extinción.

# de escuelas
normales que
incorporan en sus
programas la
educación
intercultural
bilingüe.

Monto presupuestario
nacional, regional y
municipal destinado al
rescate y
fortalecimiento de las
lenguas indígenas.

# de docentes
indígenas formados
en la educación
intercultural
bilingüe.

# de instituciones de
educación formal e
informal y centros de
investigación

Sistemas lingüísticos de
pueblos indígenas
fortalecidos y en desarrollo.

# de hablantes lenguas
desagregados por género y
ciclo de vida.

# y calidad de
textos publicados y
utilizándose en
programas

101

trabajando en el
rescate y
fortalecimiento de
lenguas indígenas.

# Políticas, programas
y proyectos con
pertinencia cultural en
apoyo a la promoción
de derechos de la
niñez y adolescencia
en comunidades
indígenas.

intercultural
bilingüe.

Escalafón, salario y
prestaciones de
docentes indígenas
especializados en
educación
intercultural
bilingüe.

Informes de
Desarrollo Humano
sobre pueblos
indígenas que
utilicen y validen
los nuevos
indicadores
culturalmente
pertinentes.
Espiritualidad

6. Integridad y
acceso a sitios
sagrados para
ceremonias
relacionadas con uso
de fuentes
tradicionales de
alimentación

Existencia de
Ordenamiento Jurídico
que reconoce y
legitima sitios
sagrados para
ceremonias
relacionadas con uso
de fuentes
tradicionales de
alimentación.

Políticas,
programas y
proyectos con
pertinencia cultural
que incorporan y
reconocen y
protegen la
existencia de sitios
sagrados
vinculados a
fuentes de
alimentos
tradicionales.

Sitios sagrados para
ceremonias vinculados a
fuentes de alimentos
tradicionales identificados,
protegidos y restablecidos.

Monto presupuestario
nacional, regional y
municipal destinado
reconocer y legitimar
sitios sagrados para
ceremonias
relacionadas con uso
de fuentes
tradicionales de
alimentación.

# de instituciones de
educación formal e
informal y centros de
investigación que

102

trabajan en identificar
y rescatar sitios
sagrados vinculados a
alimentación
tradicional.
Migración

7. Tasas de migración
rural a centros
urbanos y posibles
patrones de
migración de retorno;
relación con uso
continuado de
alimentos
tradicionales

Existencia y
organización de
unidades estadísticas
nacionales, regionales
y municipales que
generen cifras
confiables
demográficas,
migratorias y
alimenticias.

Programas de
formación de
recursos humanos
indígenas para
generar estadísticas
e indicadores de
Desarrollo Humano
Sostenible
culturalmente
pertinentes.

Censo de población indígena
y hábitos de consumo
desagregados por género,
edad y grupo étnico en
centros urbanos y
metropolitanos.
Número de establecimientos
de atención integral a
población indígena
inmigrante en centros
urbanos y metropolitanos.

Desarrollo de redes
de abastecimiento y
mercados para
alimentos
tradicionales en
sitios de
emigración.

Existencia de
publicaciones
especializadas
sobre el valor y
calidad de
alimentos
tradicionales.
Consentimiento
libre, previo e
informado(CLPI)
(Comunicación,
información y
participación
organizados)

8. Cantidad y
efectividad de
consultas con
integrantes y
representantes de la
comunidad para
planificar,
implementar y
evaluar aplicando el
CLPI y pertinencia
cultural a políticas y
programas de
desarrollo de Estados,
agencias externas u
otras entidades

# de leyes,
instituciones, decretos
para exigir, monitorear
y evaluar la aplicación
de CLPI en convenios
internacionales,
políticas públicas
nacionales, regionales
y municipales,
agencias externas de
cooperación
multilateral, bilateral y
ONGs.

# de políticas
públicas, programas
y proyectos
formulados e
implementados y
evaluados en base
al CLPI.

Fortalecimiento de identidad,
autodeterminación y mejoría
del índice de desarrollo
humano sostenible de
Pueblos Indígenas.

Autodeterminación y

9. Ejercicio efectivo
de derechos políticos

Existencia de
ordenamiento jurídico

Existencia de
instituciones y

Fortalecimiento de identidad,
autodeterminación y mejoría

103

Autonomía

vinculados a la
autonomía y
autodeterminación.

que reconozca y
garantice derechos
históricos,
económicos, sociales,
culturales, civiles y
políticos de Pueblos
Indígenas.

políticas públicas
que implementen el
ordenamiento
jurídico de
derechos
autonómicos.

del índice de desarrollo
humano sostenible de
Pueblos Indígenas.

Institucionalidad autonómica
consolidada y en pleno
funcionamiento.
Articulación y
presencia de
modelos y
propuestas de
desarrollo de
Pueblos Indígenas
en planes
nacionales de
desarrollo.

Sociedad y Estado
incluyentes Interculturales y
multiétnicos.

104
 We use cookies to improve our service for you. You can find more information in our data protection declaration. 
 Resistance to genetically modified seeds in Africa 
 Seeds modified in a lab are often touted as a means to boost agriculture and food security in Africa. There is some resistance on the continent and debate on preserving its traditional seed base instead. 
 Ghana recently hosted a conference focused on the question of genetically modified organism (GMO) seed varieties versus those that have traditionally spawned the continent's staple crops. 
 The increasing commercialization of food and agriculture, the diversity of crops, food as part of culture and identity and sustaining food needs without a switch to GMO agriculture dominated their discussions. 
 The meeting of experts and activists from Ethiopia, Kenya, Togo, South Africa and Zimbabwe took place in the northern city of Tamale, at the heart of a region in Ghana where agriculture is a driving force in the local economy. 
 In Ethiopia, local farmers have rejected GMO agriculture – apart from the genetically modified insect-resistant Bt cotton – despite intensive lobbying, often by the purveyors of GMO seeds, multi-national giants. 
 Burkina Faso's cotton companies stopped using genetically modified seeds supplied by Monsanto in 2016, citing a drop in quality. 
 Food sovereign 
 Sulemana Abdullai, the board chairman of the African Biodiversity Network, (ABN)said GMO is not a sure way to go. 
 "There isn't much evidence to suggest that genetically modified crops are doing better, in terms of food security or nutrition security or income security," Abdullai said. 
 "In fact on the contrary, it is shown with indigenous production methods and farming systems, because of their ability to plant more than one crop using locally-adapted seeds." 
 Farmers who use traditional seeds actually own the bulk of what they produce, he argued. “They are food sovereign.” 
 Sustaining food diversity through the use of traditional seeds is possible in Africa, said Ridwan Mohammed of the Institute for Sustainable Development (ISD), a non-governmental organization working with farmers across Ethiopia. 
 "When we talk about diversity, it is not the diversity of crops. There is a diversity of diet in that. Therefore, once our farmers have diversity of crops, especially of local crops, they will have diversified food, which is good for health,” Mohammed said. 
 "We are still promoting that, working with our farmers closely on the benefits of preserving and conserving these traditional seed varieties." 
 Watch video02:11 
 Now live 
 02:11 mins. 
 Monsanto takeover spurs Africa fears 
 Maize 'past and gone' 
 Takalani Mashudu, one of the activists who attended the conference, warned that traditional seeds are already becoming extinct in his native South Africa and Togo. 
 "Generally in South Africa we are using GMOS, which is not really good for our health. It is difficult to find the old maize because that is past and gone. But we're fighting against it,” Mashudu said. 
 In its literature on GMOs, United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) says the transfer of allergenic genes in different crops can cause dangerous reactions in people with allergies. 
 Concerns over the negative impact on small-scale farmers around the world of seed market dominance by a few agricultural companies have also been raised, according to the agency. 
 According to the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)concerns over seed market dominance by few agricultural companies, negatively impacting small-scale farmers globally have been raised 
 Traditional seeds are sold informally in many parts of Africa. 
 Interferes with culture 
 The FAO also cites the transfer of allergenic genes in different crops, causing dangerous reactions in people with allergies. 
 Read more: Does glyphosate cause cancer? Monsanto herbicide trials take shape in US 
 In Africa, Monsato – a US Based agrochemical and agricultural biotechnology corporation and the world's largest GMO seed and pesticide seller – has been criticized over its market dominance. 
 Mshudu told DW how GMOs has interfered with indigenous culture in places where agriculture is often tied to beliefs and practices. 
 "We cannot actually communicate with our ancestors by using the GMO seeds because the seeds don't know the land. There are some chemicals which have been used to assist the seeds to grow, so we really need to use the local seeds that the ancestors know,” Mashudu told DW. 
 Mashudu said using GMO grains is like speaking to the ancestors in a foreign language. 
 Small-scale farmers feed the world 
 Hardi Tijani, the head of the Ghanaian non-governmental organization Regional Advisory Information and Network Systems (RAINS), which works with marginalized communities, agreed. 
 "Culture without food is not culture. So, when you lose your food, you lose your identity. So yes, we can talk about increased production but we also need to recognize that people around Africa are very passionate about their culture,” Tijani said. 
 A high crop yield is one of the arguments advanced by proponents of GMOs, increasingly as agriculture is seen as a commercial venture. 
 Small-scale farmers in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa are the main producers of food, contributing up to 80 percent of food consumed, according to the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). 
 The advent of genetically engineered foods, with the release of a delayed-ripened tomato, more than two decades ago has shifted to cash crops such corn, soya, canola and cotton. 
 Many developed nations are seeing a growing trend away from GMO crops towards organic farming. As researchers in Ghana look in the opposite direction, with a trial to assess the suitability of GMO crops for farmers, the future of traditional seeds remains to be seen. 
 Sophie Mbugua and Benita van Eyssen contributed to this report. 
 This time, it's tear gas: masked man at a farmers and student protest in Colombia, August 2013. Photo: Nick Jaussi via Flickr (CC BY-NC-SA). 
 This time, it's tear gas: masked man at a farmers and student protest in Bogota, Colombia, August 2013. Photo: Nick Jaussi via Flickr (CC BY-NC-SA). 
 The mass spraying of glyphosate in Colombia, both on farmland and in the 'war on drugs', is a direct an attack on small scale farmers, rural communities and FARC rebels, writes W.T. Whitney Jr. But since the chemical was declared a 'probable carcinogen' Colombia has restricted aerial applications. The first step in a wider backlash against the toxic herbicide? 
 Spraying has contributed to fear and poverty in targeted regions. Consequently, rural populations, Afro-Colombians and indigenous peoples particularly, have had to abandon small landholdings and move into cities or neighbouring countries. 
 Monsanto Corporation's glyphosate, sold as 'Roundup', is the world's most widely used herbicide. 
 For the globalized capitalist economy it's a tool for wealth accumulation and, secondarily, for subjugating rural populations. In Colombia glyphosate is a weapon of war. 
 For 20 years the US and Colombian governments have used glyphosate in their so-called drug war to eradicate coca crops. Glyphosate now returns to the news. The occasion is ripe for a look at the herbicide's outsized role in the world economy and its dire effects everywhere. 
 Acting on President Juan Manuel Santos' recommendation, Colombia's National Drug Council on May 14 banned aerial spraying of glyphosate. The ruling has implications for beleaguered rural life in Colombia due to far-reaching effects of the chemical. They are due mainly to the aerial spray method of delivering glyphosate, which is unique to Colombia. 
 The decision also bears on peace negotiations in Havana between FARC rebels and the Colombian government because the drug war serves as cover for war against the FARC, at least according to the government's political opposition. 
 The trigger: WHO decision to class glyphosate 'probable carcinogen' 
 The government's action was in response to a March 20, 2015 statement from the World Health Organization's International Agency for Research on Cancer. The claim there was that glyphosate is "probably carcinogenic to humans", that it causes "DNA and chromosomal damage in human cells [and there is] convincing evidence that [it] also can cause cancer in laboratory animals." 
 Even so, days before the government's announcement, US Ambassador in Colombia Kevin Whitaker publicly called for continuation of the fumigation program. 
 Glyphosate gained worldwide usage and Monsanto - no longer the chemical's sole manufacturer since its patents expired in 2000 - became its leading purveyor due in each instance to the chemical's biological function. 
 It kills all growing plants within reach, with two exceptions: crops grown from seeds genetically altered to resist glyphosate's noxious effects; and the growing number of weeds that have acquired resistance to it through over-use. Monsanto conveniently sells both the seeds and the herbicide. 
 Vietnam style defoliation in present-day Colombia 
 Colombian authorities long ago licensed Monsanto to import and sell genetically modified seeds for human use and for animal feeds. The government's decision on fumigations does not affect those regulations or the use of glyphosate for crops. 
 Together with Dow Chemical, Monsanto produced the dioxin- containing defoliant 'Agent Orange', based on the herbicide 2,4D, that the US military used in Vietnam. Drug war fumigations in Colombia recall that misadventure. 
 Adverse effects have included loss of soil fertility, widespread deforestation, destruction of crops farmers grow for food, water contamination, and a plague of human ailments. Anecdotal evidence suggests increased prevalence of cancers and birth defects. 
 Until now health warnings on glyphosate have fallen on deaf ears, maybe due to Monsanto Corporation's lobbying power with government regulators. Data taken from the US Environmental Protection Agency suggest Monsanto knew about glyphosate's potential for human toxicity in 1981. 
 Animal studies then and since have shown that low-dose glyphosate causes "precancerous conditions" and also kidney damage that continues through generations. Recent studies from Europe, Argentina, and the United States have demonstrated glyphosate's presence in human milk, urine, and blood. 
 The Colombian government in 2008 paid Ecuador for harm caused by glyphosate sprayed along their common border and has prohibited fumigations on or near national parks. Lawyers in Los Angeles recent initiated a class action law suit against Monsanto alleging false advertising: Monsanto claimed that the herbicide "targets an enzyme only found in plants and not in humans or animals." 
 But now, the victims are the poor 
 Spraying has contributed to fear and poverty in targeted regions. Consequently, rural populations, Afro-Colombians and indigenous peoples particularly, have had to abandon small landholdings and move into cities, or take up residence in neighboring countries. Estimates of 6.3 million displaced Colombians rank second to figures applying to Syria, the world leader in that category. 
 Some 80% of displaced Colombians live in poverty, 35.5% in extreme poverty; Colombia's overall rural poverty rate is 65%. Departing families have left behind 17.5 million acres to be taken over for large-scale agricultural operations, mining projects and cattle ranching. 
 Indeed, Monsanto Corporation has 'strode the globe like a colossus' (in the words of an old saying). Monsanto is first in the world in seed production, accounting for 41% of all seeds and 90% of genetically-modified seeds. It ranks 5th in pesticide production. 
 Monsanto is now trying to buy Swiss - based Syngenta Corporation, first and third in the world for pesticide and seed sales, respectively. The combined entity would generate $45 billion in annual income and control 54% and 33%, respectively, of world seed and pesticide sales. 
 No more aerial spraying! No more ceding to US pressures! 
 Popular mobilizations against Monsanto, ongoing for years, have mounted recently, particularly in India, Hungary, Germany, and Argentina. In Colombia, politically left opposition groups, FARC peace negotiators among them, are backing the government's decision to end glyphosate fumigations. 
 They are calling upon the government to bolster farmers' capabilities for producing and marketing food crops thus enabling them to give up coca growing. They say: no more aerial sprayings, plan for sustainable rural development, protect human health and the environment, and defend national sovereignty - no more "ceding to pressures from the United States ... and Monsanto." 
 US government backing for Monsanto Corporation extends far beyond instigation of glyphosate areal fumigations in Colombia. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, an Obama administration project at issue now, would open up Asian nations to sales of genetically modified seeds and agricultural chemicals. 
 Critics say the pact will injure farmers there just as NAFTA hurt Mexican farmers and the US-Colombia Free Trade Agreement is injuring Colombian farmers. 
 But farmers should expect no sympathy from Presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, whose connections to Monsanto "go way back the Rose Law Firm where she worked", according to the Organic Consumers Association. Rose represents Monsanto, Tyson, and Walmart, all "world leaders in genetic engineering, animal production and industrialized food." 
 In 2014 Monsanto donated half a million dollars to the Clinton Family Foundation while spending more than $3 million on congressional lobbying. Other donors with interests in corporate agribusiness include Coca-Cola ($5m), AstraZeneca ($150k), Dow Chemical ($1m), Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa ($1m), Walmart / Walton Foundation ($2.25m) and the pro-GMO Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which together with Microsoft donated $26m. 
 Clinton is a firm supporter of Monsanto and other multinational corporations involved with agriculture, and GMOs, which she praised at the 2014 Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO) convention in San Diego. In April she appointed long-time Monsanto lobbyist Jerry Crawford as an advisor to her 'Ready for Hillary' Political Action Committee 
 If Colombia and other countries find they are dealing with Hillary as US President, one thing is clear. Any attempts to curb the use of GMOs, glyphosate and other agrochemicals owned by US corporations will be met with fierce countermeasures from Washington DC. 
 W.T. Whitney Jr. is a retired pediatrician and political journalist living in Maine. 
 This article originally ran in Spanish on Rebelion and was subsequently translated to English by the author for CounterPunch. This version contains some additional reporting by The Ecologist. 
 Help us keep The Ecologist working for the planet 
 The Ecologist website is a free service, published by The Resurgence Trust, a UK-based educational charity. We work hard - with a small budget and tiny editorial team - to bring you the wide-ranging, independent journalism we know you value and enjoy, but we need your help. Please make a donation to support The Ecologist platform. Thank you! 
 Seed is the source of life, it is the self urge of life to express itself, to renew itself, to multiply, to evolve in perpetuity in freedom. 
 Seed is the embodiment of bio cultural diversity. It contains millions of years of biological and cultural evolution of the past, and the potential of millennia of a future unfolding. 
 Seed Freedom is the birth right of every form of life and is the basis for the protection of biodiversity. 
 Seed Freedom is the birth right of every farmer and food producer. Farmers rights to save, exchange, evolve, breed, sell seed is at the heart of Seed Freedom. When this freedom is taken away farmers get trapped in debt and in extreme cases commit suicide. 
 Seed Freedom is the basis of Food Freedom, since seed is the first link in the food chain. 
 Seed Freedom is threatened by patents on seed, which create seed monopolies and make it illegal for farmers to save and exchange seed. Patents on seed are ethically and ecologically unjustified because patents are exclusive rights granted for an invention. Seed is not an invention. Life is not an invention. 
 Seed Freedom of diverse cultures is threatened by Biopiracy and the patenting of indigenous knowledge and biodiversity. Biopiracy is not innovation – it is theft. 
 Seed Freedom is threatened by genetically engineered seeds, which are contaminating our farms, thus closing the option for GMO-free food for all. Seed Freedom of farmers is threatened when after contaminating our crops, corporations sue farmer for “stealing their property”. 
 Seed Freedom is threatened by the deliberate transformation of the seed from a renewable self generative resource to a non renewable patented commodity. The most extreme case of non renewable seed is the “Terminator Technology” developed with aim to create sterile seed. 
 We commit ourselves to defending seed freedom as the freedom of diverse species to evolve; as the freedom of human communities to reclaim open source seed as a commons. 
 To this end, we will save seed, we will create community seed banks and seed libraries, we will not recognize any law that illegitimately makes seed the private property of corporations. We will stop the patents on seed. 
 Send to Email AddressYour NameYour Email AddressCancel 
 Post was not sent - check your email addresses! 
 Email check failed, please try again 
 Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email. 
 By continuing to use the site, you agree to the use of cookies. more informationAccept 
 The cookie settings on this website are set to "allow cookies" to give you the best browsing experience possible. If you continue to use this website without changing your cookie settings or you click "Accept" below then you are consenting to this. 
 Demonstrators rally against Monsanto in global anti-GMO protest 
 The Associated Press Published Saturday, May 25, 2013 12:30PM EDT Last Updated Sunday, May 26, 2013 6:30AM EDT 
 LOS ANGELES -- Protesters rallied in dozens of cities Saturday as part of a global protest against seed giant Monsanto and the genetically modified food it produces, organizers said. 
 Organizers said "March Against Monsanto" protests were held in 52 countries and 436 cities, including Los Angeles where demonstrators waved signs that read "Real Food 4 Real People" and "Label GMOs, It's Our Right to Know." 
 Genetically modified plants are grown from seeds that are engineered to resist insecticides and herbicides, add nutritional benefits or otherwise improve crop yields and increase the global food supply. 
 Most corn, soybean and cotton crops grown in the United States today have been genetically modified. But critics say genetically modified organisms can lead to serious health conditions and harm the environment. The use of GMOs has been a growing issue of contention in recent years, with health advocates pushing for mandatory labeling of genetically modified products even though the federal government and many scientists say the technology is safe. 
 The 'March Against Monsanto' movement began just a few months ago, when founder and organizer Tami Canal created a Facebook page on Feb. 28 calling for a rally against the company's practices. 
 "If I had gotten 3,000 people to join me, I would have considered that a success," she said Saturday. Instead, she said an "incredible" number of people responded to her message and turned out to rally. 
 "It was empowering and inspiring to see so many people, from different walks of life, put aside their differences and come together today," Canal said. The group plans to harness the success of the event to continue its anti-GMO cause. 
 "We will continue until Monsanto complies with consumer demand. They are poisoning our children, poisoning our planet," she said. "If we don't act, who's going to?" 
 Protesters in Buenos Aires and other cities in Argentina, where Monsanto's genetically modified soy and grains now command nearly 100 per cent of the market, and the company's Roundup-Ready chemicals are sprayed throughout the year on fields where cows once grazed. They carried signs saying "Monsanto-Get out of Latin America" 
 Monsanto Co., based in St. Louis, said that it respects people's rights to express their opinion on the topic, but maintains that its seeds improve agriculture by helping farmers produce more from their land while conserving resources such as water and energy. 
 The Food and Drug Administration does not require genetically modified foods to carry a label, but organic food companies and some consumer groups have intensified their push for labels, arguing that the modified seeds are floating from field to field and contaminating traditional crops. The groups have been bolstered by a growing network of consumers who are wary of processed and modified foods. 
 The U.S. Senate this week overwhelmingly rejected a bill that would allow states to require labeling of genetically modified foods. 
 The Biotechnology Industry Organization, a lobbying group that represents Monsanto, DuPont & Co. and other makers of genetically modified seeds, has said that it supports voluntary labeling for people who seek out such products. But it says that mandatory labeling would only mislead or confuse consumers into thinking the products aren't safe, even though the FDA has said there's no difference between GMO and organic, non-GMO foods. 
 However, state legislatures in Vermont and Connecticut moved ahead this month with votes to make food companies declare genetically modified ingredients on their packages. And supermarket retailer Whole Foods Markets Inc. has said that all products in its North American stores that contain genetically modified ingredients will be labeled as such by 2018. 
 Whole Foods says there is growing demand for products that don't use GMOs, with sales of products with a "Non-GMO" verification label spiking between 15 per cent and 30 per cent. 
 Local activist Kalli Smith energizes a crowd of more than 150 protestors along Water Street as a Worldwide protest against Monsanto and Genetically Modified Foods reaches the Cape Fear Region, in downtown Wilmington, N. C., Saturday afternoon, May 25, 2013. (The Star-News, Jeff Janowski) 
 People carry signs during a protest against Monsanto in Montpelier, Vt. on Saturday, May 25, 2013. (AP / Mark Collier) 
 Demonstrators hold signs reading in Spanish 'Glyphosate = illness, disability, death,' 'Genocide concealed by agrochemicals in Argentina,' and 'Get out Monsanto from Argentina' near the offices of Monsanto in Buenos Aires, Argentina, Saturday, May 25, 2013. (AP / Natacha Pisarenko) 
 A masked demonstrator holds up a sign that reads in Spanish 'Get Monsanto out of Latin America!' near the offices of seed giant Monsanto in Buenos Aires, Argentina, Saturday, May 25, 2013. (AP / Natacha Pisaren 
Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

Adhikari

Seed Sovereignty: Analysing the Debate on Hybrid Seeds and GMOs
and Bringing About Sustainability in Agricultural Development
Jagannath Adhikari*
* Visiting Fellow, The Australian National University
Corresponding author: jagannath.adhikari@gmail.com

Abstract: The paper further contributes to the debate on the use of hybrid and Genetically Modified Organisms
(GMOs) in Nepal by bringing in the concept of seed sovereignty for sustainable agriculture and food security.
Moreover, it argues that this debate needs to be looked at from the food system as a whole and at the corporate
sector’s interest to control the whole food system. The way the concept of ‘food sovereignty’ was developed to
counter the control of the corporate sector on local agricultural production, the concept of ‘seed sovereignty’
can equally be deployed to save the local genotype, maintain agro-biodiversity and agro-ecology and produce
healthy food in an ecologically and climate change-adaptive ways. As the seed is basic to the whole food system,
the corporate agricultural sector is precisely hitting at the seed sovereignty of farmers so that they become
dependent on them, eventually leading to their monopolistic control over the food system. Therefore, the
paper argues that the major concern should be focused on farmers’ seed sovereignty as the first step towards
sustainable agriculture.
Key words: Seeds, agriculture, seed sovereignty, food sovereignty, genetically-modified seeds, corporate
control.

INTRODUCTION
Debate on the use of hybrid seeds and geneticallymodified seeds (or Genetically Modified Organisms
[GMOs]) for enhancing farm productivity
heightened in Nepal after the United States Agency
for International Developments (USAID’s)
press release in September 2011, announcing
partnership between the Government of Nepal’s
(GoN) Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
(MoAC) and United States of America’s (USA)
multinational company, Monsanto, on a pilot
maize production project in Nepal. This pilot
project was initiated to introduce hybrid maize
seeds produced by Monsanto into Nepal. Under
the project, Monsanto was to set up test plots
to promote new seeds in Chitwan, Nawalparasi
and Kavre districts, with training to 20,000
farmers in hybrid maize production methods
and help in marketing the seeds. The potential
benefits, as argued by USAID and Monsanto,
were improvements in Nepal’s food security and
enhancement of income of Nepalese farmers.
A newspaper reported the following statement
of USAID Mission Director in Nepal, David C
Atteberry: “Most maize farmers are unaware of

the health and financial benefits that high-yielding
hybrid seeds can provide. Improved seeds and
targeted capacity building on crop management
will allow maize producers in Nepal to reap the
full benefit of their labour (Nepali Times 2011:
1). A further rationale for the project was given
by USAID, saying that Nepal only grows half its
current annual requirement of 270,000 tons of
maize for human and animal consumption, and
the rest is imported; the project will help to make
Nepal self-sufficient and save Nepalese Rupees
(NRs) 200 million in such imports.
After the release of the news of the above potential
project, social and environmental activists and
organic food producers expressed their worries
about the potential harms of the involvement
of a multinational company and introduction of
hybrid seeds in the name of food security (Fuller
2011). Apprehensions were expressed about
Monsanto’s interest in genetically modified crops
and that the company would use its test plots to
propagate seeds that will contaminate the local
gene pool, as well as make farmers dependent

33

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

on them for the seeds, agro-chemicals and other
inputs that are required for growing these seeds.
In the later part of 2013 and early 2014, the
controversy of this proposed project reached a
climax when a big business house in Kathmandu,
Chaudhary Group, announced its decision to
introduce and distribute maize and vegetable
hybrid seeds of Monsanto (The Himalayan 2013;
Regmi 2013) through its subsidiary CG Seeds
and Fertilizer - a local agent of Monsanto. At
the same time, newspaper reports revealed that
GMOs had already been tested in Nepal with
Monsanto’s involvement. There were debates in
social media as well as in Nepali press about the
benefits of hybrid seeds and genetically modified
seeds. Social protests were also organized
to oppose the project. Even though a large
section of the public was against the proposal
to introduce GMOs, government agencies were
mostly supportive of the introduction of hybrid
seeds and GMOs. They argued that hybrid maize
had already been introduced into Nepal long ago
and that there was no harm to the environment
if chemicals were used in a balanced way with
organic fertilizers. On the other hand, Nepalese
government agencies were also aware of the fact
that there existed some genetically-modified
cotton and vegetables. Furthermore, they argued
that Nepal would not be able to stop GMOs if
India opted for GMO seeds as such seeds could
easily infiltrate, as has been happening now, due
to open border.
Despite popular protests against introduction of
hybrid seeds and GMOs in Nepal, these seeds
are entering Nepal. Currently, up to 30 foreign
companies are supplying hybrid seeds in Nepal.
Almost 90 per cent of imported vegetable seeds
and 50 per cent of the vegetable seeds used in
Nepal are hybrid (The Himalayan 2013: 1).
Similarly, almost 20 per cent of corn seeds are
imported and almost all of them are hybrid (ibid).
A large amount of hybrid seeds is imported from

34

Adhikari

India and China and a small fraction also comes
from developed countries like Japan. From time
to time, there have been cases of crop failure
leading to desperate situations for farmers where
such seeds were used. These events also led to
debates on the benefits of these seeds.
In the emerging context, as discussed above,
this paper critically looks at the role of seeds
in sustainable farming or food production. It
argues that the seed policy in Nepal should also
be linked with the food sovereignty policy that
the government is following. This calls for taking
together the concepts of seed sovereignty and
food sovereignty, whether in popular discourse
or in policy and programme implementation.
This will then put farmers in full control of
their seeds and food production activities. This,
however, does not mean that there should not
be improvement in seeds, which farmers have
been doing since they started domestication of
crops and animals. The paper concludes that
there should be continuous improvement of
seeds through the collaboration of farmers and
scientists, but such improvements should not
undermine the rights and ability of farmers to
control their seeds, which means their right to
use, exchange and reproduce seeds freely.
This is a policy review paper which derives
pertinent information from a variety of sources.
Most of the information is collected from
secondary sources: newspaper reports, opinion
pieces, journal articles, government statistics,
research studies already conducted and thorough
analysis of other documents.

SEED SOVEREIGNTY AND FOOD
SOVEREIGNTY

In Nepal’s context, there has been a lot of debate
on food security and food sovereignty. Even
though Nepal’s Interim Constitution (2007)
states that ‘food sovereignty’ is the ultimate
goal in agricultural development, this has not
been brought into application. In practical

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

sense, still the focus is on ‘food security’. This
concept, popular with donor agencies and Non
Governmental Organisations (NGOs), does
not make much distinction on who produces
food, where this is produced and how this is
produced, but cares mainly on whether there is
food available in the market and whether people
have access to it. Therefore, the concept of food
security does not correlate with sustainable food
production, but rather it puts more focus on
availability and access through trade and income
generation for purchasing food. To enrich the
quality of food, the concept of food security
suggests supplementing nutritious elements in
the food in order to provide nutrition or using
genetically engineered food like ‘golden’ rice,
which is believed to have more vitamin A.
The concept of ‘food sovereignty’ has been
coined to provide food security through local
sustainable production. ‘Food sovereignty is the
right of peoples, countries and state unions to
define their agricultural and food policy without
the dumping of agricultural commodities into
foreign countries. Food sovereignty organizes
food production and consumption according to
the needs of local communities, giving priority
to production for local consumption. Food
sovereignty includes the right to protect and
regulate national agricultural and livestock
production and to shield the domestic market
from the dumping of agricultural surpluses
and low-price imports from other countries.
Landless people, peasants and small farmers
must get access to land, water and seed, as well
as productive resources and adequate public
services. Food sovereignty and sustainability are
of higher priority areas and should not be left to
be determined by trade’ (Via Campesina 2014).
The following are some basic features of food
sovereignty, which also clearly talks about the
seed issue (Adhikari 2009):
• Giving priority to local food systems in
meeting food security.

•

•
•

•

•

•
•

•
•
•
•

•

•

Adhikari

Guaranteeing access of all types of farmers to
land, water, seeds and credit. This requires
genuine, comprehensive land reforms, for
open access to seeds, and for safeguarding
water as a public good to be equitably and
sustainably distributed.
The right of family farmers and peasants to
produce food.
The right of consumers to be able to decide
on what they consume, and how and by
whom it is produced.
The right of countries to protect themselves
from low-priced agricultural and food
imports.
Agricultural prices must be linked to
production costs with a profit margin
required for a quality life and dignity of food
producers. Countries should be entitled to
impose taxes, quotas and bans on excessively
cheap imports.
The people should be able to take part in the
formulation of agricultural policies.
The recognition of women farmers’ rights,
who play a major role in agricultural
production and in food.
The recognition of indigenous people’s rights
to their resources.
Abolishing all direct and indirect export
supports.
Phasing out domestic production subsidies
that promote unsustainable agriculture.
Developing local food economies based on
local production and processing, and the
development of local food outlets.
Recognizing and enforcing communities’
legal and customary rights to make decisions
concerning their local, traditional resources,
even where no legal rights have previously
been allocated.
Prohibit all forms of patenting of life or any
of its components, and the appropriation

35

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

of knowledge associated with food and
agriculture through intellectual property
rights regimes; and
• Protecting farmers’, indigenous peoples’
and local community rights over plant
genetic resources and associated knowledge,
including farmers’ rights to exchange and
reproduce seeds.
‘Seed sovereignty’ can be defined the way food
sovereignty has been defined. The seed is the
first link in the food chain and seed sovereignty
is the foundation of food sovereignty. If farmers
do not have their own seeds or access to open
pollinated varieties that they can save, improve
and exchange, they have no seed sovereignty
and consequently no food sovereignty. Seed
sovereignty basically means farmers’ control
over the seeds (germplasm) they use and they
have developed in addition to community and
public provisioning of seeds in their diversity and
quality to maintain the culturally, economically
and ecologically sustainable farming system.
Therefore, seed sovereignty is the availability,
access to and control over seeds that farmers
have been using in their fields. Here, control
also means the right to reproduce seed. In sum,
seed sovereignty includes the farmer’s rights to
save, breed and exchange seeds, to access diverse
open source seeds which can be saved and which
are not patented, genetically modified, owned or
controlled by emerging seed giants. It is based on
reclaiming seeds and biodiversity as a common
and public good (Aljazeera 2012). This is also the
view of The Campaign for Seed Sovereignty in
Europe, which has put the following demands
for seed sovereignty (CSS Europa 2014):
•
•

Open access to fertile and diverse seeds free
of any form of legal protection or patenting;
The right of farmers and gardeners to obtain
seeds from their harvest, to re-sow, distribute
and sell them;

36

Adhikari

•

A new model of agriculture based on
local, small-scale food webs rather than
monocultures requiring high inputs;
• New agricultural and trade policies promoting
production for local needs and not global
‘free’ trade, dominated by transnational
corporations; and
• Policies that favour the needs of farmers
and consumers, health and the environment
instead of profits for big businesses.
These demands clearly show that seed sovereignty
requires more than just free access to seeds. It is
also about the way of life of farming households
and communities and emphasizes smallholder
farming operated by many farmers supplying the
local food requirements rather than large-scale
trade. In a way, this concept is also applicable
for Nepal as farming here is operated mainly by
smallholders, and, in such a case, access to free
seeds in open market and exchange system is
essential. Moreover, it calls for health and safety
issues in relation to food production and food
products.
Like in the domain of food, there is also a debate
on seed security versus seed sovereignty. In the
domain of seed, there is not much discussion on
seed security or seed sovereignty, even though
the concept of seed security has started to creep
into agricultural development field. For example,
the United Nations’ (UN) Food and Agricultural
Organization (FAO) has started to use the concept
of seed security in recent times. According to
the FAO definition, ‘seed security is defined as
ready access by rural households, particularly
farmers and farming communities, to adequate
quantities of quality seed and planting materials
of crop varieties, adapted to their agro-ecological
conditions and socioeconomic needs, at planting
time, under normal and abnormal weather
conditions’ (FAO 2014:1). This definition of
seed security is akin to general definition of ‘food
security’ in that proper attention is not focused
on ‘control’, but on availability and access.

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

In recent times, the concept of seed security
(availability, access and seed quality) has included
other two main elements: varietal suitability and
resilience. The resilience is to be gauged from six
characteristics: productivity, stability, diversity,
agency, equity and sustainability. Again, this
concept is silent on farmers’ control on seed and
their capacity to regrow or reproduce the seed.
It is clear that the above definition or
characterization/conceptualization of ‘seed
security’ does not lead to sustainable agriculture.
In such a conceptualization, the question comes
as to who provides availability and access and
how this affects farmers’ ability to reproduce
the seeds they use. It is interesting that ‘seed
security’ is often employed in situations of seed
scarcity created by adverse weather patterns like
drought and disasters like tsunami and flooding.
The basic rationale given for providing seed
security under such circumstances is that, in
emergency situations, farmer households which
are displaced or their farms are destroyed due to
disaster, lose their seeds and thus the capacity for
food production. By supplying good quality seeds
of appropriate variety, it is assumed that farmers
can resume and increase agricultural production,
thereby reducing or eliminating dependence on
food aid following the next harvest. But again,
this approach is silent on the right to reproduce
the seed and whether the supplied seed can be
propagated. Otherwise, like other development
aid, including food aid, farmers become dependent
on business companies to get the seed and this
could lead to another disaster. In fact, as discussed
below, such disasters have already started to
happen. Therefore, ‘seed sovereignty’ should be
basic in food aid or food security or agricultural
production strategies.

GLOBAL AGRI-BUSINESS COMPANIES
AND CONTROL OVER SEEDS
It is a common understanding that bigger and
fewer number of companies are increasingly
controlling the food system. The emergence of

Adhikari

new technology of genetic engineering or biotechnology is helping them to achieve this, and
they are forcing, through their governments or
inter-governmental organizations like the World
Trade Organization (WTO) or UN agencies,
the governments to use these technologies (e.g.
GMOs) by changing restrictive policies. These
technologies and policy changes are pushing the
biodiversity, especially genetic diversity, towards
extension and food system into the grip of these
companies because these technologies promote
monoculture and chemical-based farming.
The regulations (like WTO’s agreement on
agriculture) that impose patenting on life forms
and control on right to reproduce seeds and
privatization of public property in the form of
common pool of genetic materials are all linked
to empowering the corporate sector at the cost
of the freedom and rights of farmers to access the
genetic resources they have conserved through
generations. The general institutional response
to the rapid loss of agricultural biodiversity was
limited to collecting seeds from farmers’ fields
and storing them away in gene banks. But then
governments have control over these banks, and
these governments generally succumb to the
pressure of the corporate sector.
The overall result of all this is that the diversified
and integrated farming systems that farmers
have built through generations are threatened,
weakening farmers’ resilience, especially in the face
of global warming. This is clearly seen in modern
agriculture. Even in South Asian countries, the
green revolution technology, which is anchored
on a few ‘high-yielding seeds of few crops and
heavy inputs of fertilizer, water and pesticides’,
has led to rapid erosion of biodiversity. But still,
as compared to chemical agriculture of developed
countries, South Asia maintains a large pool of
genotypes as a significant proportion of farmers
have maintained their traditional farming system.
Over the last two decades, corporate control on
seeds (and on food system generally) has increased

37

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

by leaps and bounds. The large corporations now
have links to inter-governmental agencies like
the UN system and with governments in the
powerful countries. They also have the ability
to change the perceptions of people and manage
perceptions through philanthropy and media.
Through perception management, corporate
grip is further tightened. The corporate sector
today sets global rules, with governments and
public seed research centres following their lead.
Such a control on seeds has led to expansion of
monoculture crop production and undermining
of farmers’ seed systems, local food production
and local food markets. The corporate control is
making the smallholders and their communities
hard to survive. In a few cases, this has compelled
farmers to commit suicide. For example, in India,
17,638 farmers committed suicide in 2009 alone,
that’s one farmer every 30 minutes; it’s estimated
that more than 250,000 Indian farmers have
committed suicide so far (Sainath 2010; Gucciardi
2012; Mercola 2012). A great number of those
affected are cash crop farmers, mainly cotton
farmers. As farmers shifted to cotton as cash
crop cultivation, they were exposed to various
vulnerabilities, which have arisen as this sector
is dominated by foreign mega corporations that
promote genetically modified seeds and exert
increasing control over the entire agricultural
industry. Most farmer suicides are a direct result
of overwhelming indebtedness. But this problem
is not limited to India as the suicide rate for
farmers is higher worldwide than for the nonfarming population. It is interesting to note that
farmers’ population is declining in general, but
the number of suicides by farmers, especially
in India, has been increasing. This shows the
desperation of farmers.
Genetically engineered seeds (or GMOs) are
considered as the main factor for the misery of
farmers, as discussed above. Some of the reasons
why GMOs and green revolution generally have
brought such miseries are (Mercola 2012:1):

38

Adhikari

•

Compared to traditional seeds, genetically
engineered seeds are very expensive and have
to be purchased in every planting season.
• Genetically engineered crops require much
more water to grow, have much higher
requirements for fertilizer and pesticide,
and so require higher investment, forcing
farmers to borrow loans. But the market for
the products is volatile and generally not in
favour of farmers, especially small farmers.
• The green revolution of the 1960s and 1970s
had already made poor farmers poorer and
wealthy farmers wealthier. Farmers became
richer at the cost of smallholders and
peasants.
• Rising prices for seeds, fertilizers, pesticides
and other farm supplies, along with falling
prices for farm commodities, are forcing
farmers to take high interest loans from
opportunistic money lenders.
• A trend from poly-culture farming (diverse
crops) to monoculture has depleted soil
fertility and increased crop damage by pests
and diseases.
• Shortage of water supplies, periodic droughts,
decreased monsoonal rainfall and poor access
to irrigation.
• Dependence on dishonest and predatory
salesmen because of lack of government
support; and
• Grossly inadequate government relief
programmes for farmers, including distress
relief, medical support and the like.
The above are some of the reasons the concept of
‘sovereignty’ in food and agriculture is growing
and has been demanded as a way to save farming,
especially smallholder farming, as a way of life of
farmers and to make agriculture sustainable and
resilient in the face of climate and other crises.
In recent decades, especially past two decades,
the concentration of power in a few agri-business

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

companies has been growing as smaller companies
are slowly engulfed by the larger transnational
companies (TNCs). There have been mergers
of small companies with large companies (ETC
Group 2011). Now, just ten corporations control
half of the global market for commercial seeds.
Most are pesticide producers focusing on the
development of genetically modified (GM) crops
that support chemical-intensive agriculture so
that farmers are compelled to buy both chemicals
and seeds.
GMO technology has been a weapon for the
corporate sector to strengthen their grip on
agriculture world over. It is seen that corporate
control is high in the crops in which there are
more GM seeds (like soyabean, oilseeds, canola,
cotton and maize). In the USA, for instance,
just one company, Monsanto, controls over 90
per cent of the seed market for soya (Patterson
2013). Corporate efforts to expand markets are
thus focusing on opening more markets to GM
crops, especially in developing countries. These
have been done in two ways: buying smaller seed
companies and then developing hybrid and/or
GM varieties of crops such as rice, wheat and
sugarcane, which have traditionally resisted
private sector involvement because of the general
practice among farmers of ‘saving and exchanging’
seeds. Attempts to introduce GM crops in Nepal
also need to be seen in this light (Adhikari 2014).
In the past twenty years, there has been very rapid
erosion of seed diversity and seed sovereignty
all over the world and concentration of control
over seeds by a very small number of giant
corporations. In 1995, when the UN organised
the Plant Genetic Resources Conference in
Leipzig, it was reported that 75 per cent of all
agricultural biodiversity had disappeared because
of the introduction of ‘modern’ varieties, which
are always cultivated as monocultures. Since
then, erosion has accelerated (ETC Group 2011).
Besides displacing and destroying diversity,
patented GMO seeds are also undermining seed

Adhikari

sovereignty. Across the world, new seed laws,
which enforce compulsory registration of seeds,
are being introduced, thus making it impossible
for small farmers to grow their own diversity
and forcing them into dependency on giant seed
corporations. Corporations are also patenting
climate-resilient seeds evolved by farmers, thus
robbing farmers of using their own seeds and
knowledge of climate adaptation.
Privatization of the seed sector (and agriculture
in general) research is a major outcome desired by
the corporate sector. Accordingly, plant breeding
has been pushed out of the public system. It is
widely known that individual farmers have been
practicing plant breeding for a long time, but
they did it with public interest and the benefits
of breeding were shared equally. Similarly, until
two decades ago, government undertook plant
breeding research and the output was shared
equally and it was free access. In a few cases,
public-private partnership has been emphasized,
but again in this system, private sector takes the
lead and reaps benefits through the ‘copyright’
system. Until the first half of the 20th century,
seeds were overwhelmingly in the hands of
farmers and public-sector plant breeders. In
the decades since then, corporate sectors have
used intellectual property laws to commodify1
the world seed supply–a strategy that aims to
control plant germplasm and maximize profits
by eliminating farmers’ rights (ETC Group
2008, 2011). Today, the proprietary seed market
accounts for a staggering share of the world’s
commercial seed supply. According to a study,
the proprietary seed market (that is, brand name
seed that is subject to exclusive monopoly, i.e.
intellectual property), now accounts for 82 per
cent of the commercial seed market worldwide.
The commercial seed market, of course, does
not include farmer-saved seeds (ETC Group
2011: 22).
Practice of giving economic value, usually for profit-making
purpose, based on market prices undermining other values of a good
or commodity like social, ecological, ritual and aesthetic values.
1

39

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

The top 10 seed companies now account for
US$20,062 million, which is 73 per cent of the
global proprietary seed market in 2009–up from
67 per cent in 2007. Therefore, corporate control
on commercial seed market is growing (see also
Table 1; ETC Group 2011: 22).
Table 1: The World’s Top 10 Seed Companies
Company – 2009

Seed sales
(US$
millions)

% of global
proprietary
seed market

Monsanto (USA)

7,297

27

DuPont (USA)

4,641

17

Syngenta
(Switzerland)

2,564

9

Groupe Limagrain
(France)

1,252

5

Land O’ Lakes
(USA)

1,100

4

997

4

700

3

635

2

Sakata (Japan)

491

2

DLF-Trifolium
(Denmark)

385

1

KWS AG
(Germany)
Bayer CropScience
(Germany)
Dow AgroSciences
(USA)

Top 10 Total

20,062

73% [of global
proprietary seed
market of 27,400
million]

Source: ETC Group 2011:22

As the monopoly in the ‘seed sector’ has increased,
basically in the hands of the corporate sector,
prices of their seeds have also increased. This
was the exact strategy they have been following
– increase the control and then raise the price. In
this context, it leaves a dirty choice for farmers:
either buy expensive seeds or quit farming. The
expensive seeds may give good production with

40

Adhikari

high dose of inputs, but in case of failure, farmers
become indebted. In countries where farmers
do not get any support from the government or
insurance companies, they have no choice except
to sell the farm and become landless farm workers
or migrate to urban areas for work. For example,
India, the home of cotton, has lost its cotton seed
diversity and cotton seed sovereignty. With the
introduction of GM cotton, some 95 per cent of
the country’s cotton seeds are now controlled
by Monsanto, and the debt trap created by being
forced to buy seed every year, with royalty
payments, has pushed hundreds of thousands of
farmers to commit suicide; of the 250,000 farmer
suicides, the majority are in the cotton belt
(Aljazeera 2012).

CONTINUED IMPORTANCE
LOCAL SEEDS

OF

Despite the claim that ‘new’ seeds, like hybrid
and GMO, will save the world from hunger
and malnutrition, traditional seeds are still very
important. A perception that traditional seeds
are not important has been generated as a way
to increase the control of the corporate sector on
seed. Until today, 50 per cent of the seed comes
from the seeds saved by farmers and 20 per
cent from other sources. The corporate sector
contributes only 30 per cent (Via Campesina
2010:5; GRAIN 2014). Small farmers and local
food system are dependent on farmer-saved seeds.
But, the growing discrimination on farmersaved seeds, for example, government’s support
in research and preservation of such seeds, is
meant to encourage people to support new
seeds like hybrid and GMO and then succumb
to intellectual property rights leading to total
corporate control on seed.
Farmer-saved seeds are still important to feed the
world. Farm-saved seed supplies 67.5 per cent of
the food and certified seed contributes only 32.5
per cent. In terms of producers, peasant farming
feeds the half of the world’s population, urban

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

gardening 8 per cent, hunting and gathering 13
per cent and ‘industrial farming’ 30 per cent (Via
Campesina 2010:5; GRAIN 2014). But, public
agencies’ attention (like government, research
institutions) is to support and expand industrial
farming–the agenda backed by the corporate
sector.
Farmer-saved seeds have several advantages; it has
helped to maintain biodiversity, especially genetic
diversity since generations, to produce a wide
diversity of food, which is essential for proper
nutrition, and is a live repository of germplasm
for further seed development. As a result, this has
been a sustainable system and, accordingly, farmers
have been getting seeds since the domestication
of crops and livestock without interruptions, and
every generation of seed had developed capacity
to adapt to the changing environment and thus
become sustainable. Otherwise, the human
civilizations would have ended a long time ago
because of several disturbances to the system,
but the diversity and continuity of seed supply
helped to prevent crises. This lesson of the
history is not given proper attention nowadays
by the policymakers.

NEPAL’S CASE: LOCAL SEEDS AND
THE DEBATE ON HYBRID SEEDS
AND GMOs
The debate on seed in Nepal came to light with
the USAID’s plan to have collaboration between
the MoAC and Monsanto Company to introduce
GM maize in Nepal (Adhikari 2014). While, the
US embassy in Kathmandu denied that it had
any proposition of introducing GMO in Nepal
through Monsanto Company (DeLisi 2011),
there were reports in the media that GMOs
were introduced in Nepal from time to time
for experimentation, as well as through food
products containing GMOs (IRIN 2012). The
clarification given by the US Ambassador was
that the USAID was interested in introducing
or improving the hybrid seed production so

Adhikari

that maize production would increase and food
security would improve. The argument for
supporting the use of hybrid maize seed and,
hence, the production of hybrid seed was that
farmers were already using these seeds from the
informal market and that the government has
been researching and producing hybrid seeds
since 1986. While there is no specific data on the
use of hybrid seeds in Nepal, it is reported by
the US ambassador that approximately 75 per
cent of tomatoes, cauliflower and many other
vegetables in Nepal are grown from hybrid seeds
(DeLisi 2011). The Nepal Agricultural Research
Council (NARC) has also approved sixteen maize
hybrids for sale in Nepal. Many of the approved
varieties come from Monsanto, and four of them
are being sold commercially here since 2004.
Moreover, statistics like ‘80 per cent of maize
produced in the Terai and 10 per cent of maize
produced in the mid hills is grown from hybrid
seed’ (DeLisi 2011) are given to support the
production and use of hybrid seeds. Moreover,
it is argued that there is more demand for such
hybrid seeds from farmers who are increasingly
resorting to informal markets, which provide low
quality hybrid seeds. The hybrid seeds have been
extensively used in crops, especially vegetables,
and most of these seeds come from India and
some from China, Japan and other developed
countries. The statistics on the use of various
types of seeds in Nepal differ from one source
to another. But, it is a fact that farmers are using
hybrid seeds more in cash crops like vegetables.
Demand for hybrid maize seeds, used primarily in
the animal feed industry, has increased as animal
feed has constituted a growing source of income
for commercial farmers. While this would be the
first time a donor, viz. USAID, subsidizes the cost
of hybrid seeds on such a large scale in Nepaltargeting 20,000 farmers in three commercial
maize - producing districts of Kavre, Chitwan
and Nawalparasi along the southern lowland belt
in the Terai region bordering India (Nepali Times

41

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

2011)—Monsanto has been exporting hybrid
maize seed to Nepal since 2004, even though
it was not widely known to people. Over the
past decade commercial farmers in the lowlands
have started using hybrid varieties, drawn by the
potential of higher yields (IRIN 2012), and these
come from informal markets in India. According
to a report, the use of hybrid maize seeds has led
to increase in the yield of the crop. For example,
preliminary findings of a study done by the South
Asia office of the International Center for Maize
and Wheat Improvement (CIMMYT) in the
lowland Nawalparasi and Palpa districts in 2011
suggest, there is almost double yields from hybrid
seeds over openly-pollinated local varieties: from
0.8 to 1.5 tons per hectare (IRIN 2012).
On this issue of whether hybrid seeds lead
to increase in production, there are debates,
especially on what is meant by the yield and
whether hybrid seeds are really efficient in the
use of energy. Hybrid seeds also equally use more
energy like pesticides, chemical fertilizers and
water. In many contexts, use of improved local
seeds with adequate management has produced
more overall benefits for farmers. For example,
in Andhra Pradesh, India, farmers became
increasingly indebted when they switched to
conventional farming, i.e. use of hybrid seeds,
pesticides and chemical fertilizers and higher
water use. But, when they adopted ‘community
managed sustainable agriculture (CMSA)’, which
emphasizes use of sustainable methods with local
improved seeds and local organic fertilizers, they
benefited in many respects, a World Bank Study
in 2011 reports (Larson and Williams 2013).
After CMSA, production costs were 33 per cent
lower than in conventional agriculture (US$180
versus US$280 per acre). The savings translated
directly to increased incomes for farmers. For
crops raised without pesticides and fertilizer,
farmers command a premium of 14–33 per cent
(ibid). Even though CMSA produce is not yet
certified organic, consumers, especially in urban

42

Adhikari

retail markets, increasingly recognize the benefits
of pesticide- and fertilizer-free food. Moreover,
the switch to the CMSA did not lead to decline
in the yield of paddy. The yield remained the
same, but diversification in food production
increased. Although CMSA brings higher labour
costs, farmers are meeting this challenge by
working together to manage pests and increase
soil fertility. Demonstrations of multi-cropping
and intercropping alternatives are helping more
small-scale and marginalized farmers in Andhra
Pradesh realize the benefits of diversification.
The other benefits of CMSA were: communities
obtained debt relief, families increased their
investments in productive assets and sustainable
land and water management, communities saw
greater business innovation and new livelihood
opportunities, food security improved, and
human and environmental health benefited.
There is potentially another problem for the use of
hybrid seeds as it could make farmers vulnerable
in crisis situation. For example, farmers in Nepal
using hybrid seeds have also experienced nonproduction of crops at all from time to time
ruining their income as well as livelihood. In,
2008, there was a loss of around NRs 2 billion due
to crop failure in Mahottari and Saptari districts
owing to hybrid seed use in maize. Similarly, the
same year, there was wheat hybrid seed failure in
Kailali. In 2009/10, there was a failure of hybrid
maize seeds provided by the Swiss Development
Cooperation (SDC) in Bara, Rautahat, Sarlahi,
Parsa and Nawalparasi districts. In 2010, there was
failure of paddy crops in Far West districts due to
defective hybrid seeds distributed by the World
Food Programme (WFP). In 2012, there was
severe crop loss in the Tarai districts due to the
use of unregistered hybrid maize seeds smuggled
from India (Shahi 2012). In 2013, farmers in Kavre
alone had to bear a loss of NRs 20 million due to
their choice of a Chinese hybrid rice seed (DY69).
Similarly, use of Indian hybrid seed caused a
loss of NRs 4.1 million (Guragain 2014). Given

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

all these experiences, there are questions about
the benefits of hybrid seeds as well. Similarly, it
clearly shows that there are clearly several viable
alternatives within the rubric of ‘sustainable
agriculture’ using local seeds and local inputs like
organic manure and local labour.
Nepal, until recently, was able to maintain a
wide range of seeds, and the traditional food
system (from farming to consumption, waste
disposal and daily religious and other cultural
practices connected with food/seed) was so
effective in preserving agro-biodiversity that
there were as many as 2,000 landraces (varieties)
of rice growing in areas from 60m to 3,050m
altitude (Upadhaya and Gupta 2000). Another
study reveals that, of the known 1,800 varieties
of indigenous landraces of rice, including wild
species in Nepal, only one variety is popularly
cultivated in the Tarai, where rice is widely grown
(Shrestha and Upadhyay 1999). Similarly, several
indigenous varieties of vegetables are at the stage
of extinction in Nepal. This evidence suggests
that local species and landraces are disappearing.
Modification of cropping pattern and expansion
in the use of hybrid seeds and imported seeds of a
few improved varieties are the main causes of this
decline in agro-biodiversity (Bittman 2013).
There are also claims that there is political interest
in promoting multinational companies like
Monsanto in the development aid related to the
seed sector. For example, USAID’s support for
the proposed hybrid/GM maize project comes
through the 2009 US Global Food Security
Act-a bill to authorize appropriations for fiscal
years 2010 through 2014. This bill was aimed to
provide assistance to foreign countries to promote
food security, to stimulate rural economies, to
improve emergency response to food crisis, to
amend the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and
for other purposes. The operational modality of
this Act is through agribusiness companies. As
US agribusiness is the only sector in which the

Adhikari

USA has a positive trade balance; a wide range
of government support is available for these
companies. Under the US Global Food Security
Act, Nepal signed an agreement with USAID and
Monsanto. This led to massive protests across the
country. In Nepal, farmer-managed informal
seed system alone contributes more than 90 per
cent to the total seed supply and use as of now.
Recently, CG Seeds and Fertilizers, a Nepali
company, came onto screen following its call for
bulk buyers of Monsanto seeds on December 13,
2013. Taking lessons from the situations in 2010,
the civil society protest has now heightened with
a strong call to stop Monsanto in Nepal, and on
January 8, 2014, the Supreme Court of Nepal
issued an interim order banning the import of
genetically modified seeds.

FOOD DEFICIT IN NEPAL AND USE
OF HYBRID SEEDS AND GMOs
The rational for the promotion of hybrid seeds
and GMOs has been given in the argument that
we need to increase production. This has been so
globalized, especially by the donor agencies like
USAID and corporate giants like Monsanto, as
well as governments and a section of scientists.
The main argument is that population has been
growing and will reach 9 billion by the turn of the
century and that almost 1 billion population of
the world are now malnourished, with 1 million
chronically exposed to hunger and malnutrition
(FAO 2013). But, it is also a fact that about 3
billion people are not eating well, if we count
obese and overweight people alongside those
with micronutrient deficiencies. Paradoxically,
as increasing numbers of people can afford to
eat well, food for the poor will become scarcer
because demand for animal products will surge,
and they require more resources like grain to
produce. A global population growth of less than
30 per cent is projected to double the demand for
animal products.

43

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

While the population is growing, there are also
arguments that there is a lot of waste of food and
overconsumption and gross unequal distribution
of food. In a way, the problem at the world scale
is not of food production. The world has long
produced enough calories, around 2,700 per day
per human, more than enough to meet the United
Nations’ projection of a population of 9 billion in
2050. There are hungry people not because food
is lacking but because not all of those calories
go to feed humans: a third goes to feed animals;
nearly 5 per cent are used to produce biofuels,
and as much as a third is wasted, all along the
food chain (Bittman 2013).
Nepal’s problem is not only ‘eating well’, it is
also of less availability and less accessibility. For
example, Nepal now produces only 80 per cent
of food at absolutely basic level. Then, about half
the children below five are malnourished (CBS
2013). Food production growth has not been
commensurate with population growth rate.
Nepal is becoming more and more dependent on
other countries for food and the food imported
from distant places obviously lacks quality. For
example, Nepal imports almost NRs 1 billion
worth of rice a month. Nepal’s rice imports in
fiscal year 2012/13 (July 16-July 15) increased to
around 504,500 tons, up about 18 per cent from
around 428,125 tons in the previous fiscal year.
In terms of value, Nepal imported about NRs 14
billion worth of rice in FY 2012/13, up about
40 per cent from around NRs 10 billion; about
98 per cent of the rice is imported from India.
In total, Nepal imported food stuff worth NRs
99.34 billion in 2012/13 - a significant increase
from NRs 76 billion in 2011/12, vegetables worth
NRs 51 billion, cereals and beverages worth NRs
26 billion, animal and vegetables worth NRs 18
billion, live animals and animal products worth
NRs 3.5 billion (Prasain 2014).
One of the reasons for increasing rice imports
is shortfall in rice production against growing
demand. Per capita rice consumption in Nepal

44

Adhikari

stands at around 122 kg per person per year,
compared to 41 kg for maize and 17 kg for wheat
(Oryza 2013). In addition, Nepal grows only
half of the maize demanded by the animal feed
industry and imports the shortfall of 135,000 tons
annually, according to USAID (IRIN 2012).
It is certainly important to increase the overall
production of all kinds of food that are nutritious.
In this context, seed improvement is certainly
required. Seed improvement can be done in
various ways – by selection, by developing hybrid
seeds and GMOs.
The basic question is the control of seeds.
And, thus, any breeding method that leads to
sustainable production of seeds, which farmers
can save and reproduce, could be an alternative.
In this context, hybrid seeds need to be produced
locally if at all this possibility is to be followed.
But, the available evidence show, as discussed
above, there are possibilities to increase food
production through improvement in farming
system under the rubric of ‘sustainable farming’,
using local seeds and local inputs.

WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE FOR
‘SEED SOVEREIGNTY’?
Various evidence and practices suggest that we
need to maintain seed sovereignty for sustainable
farming. Seed sovereignty is not about stopping
innovations for improvement of seeds,
which needs to be done remaining within the
framework of seed sovereignty. So, continuous
improvement with the participation of farmers
and seed scientists is essential. The major thing
here should be that farmers are able to save seeds
and reproduce them without deteriorating their
quality and diversity. So, in this context, some
policymakers in Nepal have argued that even
hybrid seeds are needed to increase production,
but these should be produced within the country
for selected crops and seeds should be made
available free by the government in such a

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014

case. Moreover, availability of opportunities to
improve seeds in farmers’ field is very important
so that it remains within the control of farmers.
At policy level, the government needs to have a
policy that stops the importation of hybrid seeds
from outside and give subsidy to farmers using
improved local seeds and imposing heavy tax on
imported hybrid seeds. The current membership
of the WTO does not restrict Nepal from
undertaking such measures as there are spaces for
such action.
The second way to maintain seed sovereignty is
to change the farming practice. Seed sovereignty
is lost in the ‘industrial model of farming’, which
is generally undertaken by large companies
using chemicals. It does not preserve the health
and productivity of earth, and, thus, more and
more chemicals and new seeds have to be used.
It also does not produce diverse types of healthy
food; rather, it produces disease-producing diets.
Smallholders’ farming is a blessing in disguise for
Nepal, which needs to be preserved. This farming
is ecologically more efficient than industrial
farming, and it can produce food without
using imported fertilizers and other chemicals.
According to the ETC Group, the industrial food
chain uses 70 per cent of agricultural resources to
provide 30 per cent of the world’s food, whereas
what ETC calls ‘the peasant food web’ produces
the remaining 70 per cent, using only 30 per cent
of the resources (ETC Group 2011).
It is true that high-yielding varieties of any major
commercial monoculture crop will produce more
per acre of grain than the peasant-bred varieties
of the same crop. Again, there are questions, as
discussed above, about the yield and productivity
and how to measure these. Sustainable farming,
on the other hand, provides a range of benefits
which are usually not accounted for in the narrow
definition of yield. For example, diversifying
crops, mixing plants and animals, planting trees
(the traditional mixed, integrated and diversified
farming system) provides not only fruit/grain

Adhikari

but also shelter for birds, shade and fertility
through nutrient recycling. Small landholders
can produce more food, and more kinds of food,
with sustainable farming techniques and with
fewer resources and lower transportation costs
(which means a lower carbon footprint), while
providing greater food security, maintaining
greater biodiversity and even better withstanding
the effects of climate change. And all of this
without the level of subsidies and other support
that industrial agriculture has received in the
last half century. Sustainable agriculture is the
future and is a constituent element of ‘seed
sovereignty’. Therefore, any innovations in seeds
need to be looked at through the perspective of
‘food sovereignty’. In this regard, Vandana Shiva
rightly says:
The seed has become the site and symbol
of freedom in an age of manipulation and
monopoly of its diversity. It plays the role
of Gandhi’s spinning wheel in this period of
recolonization through free trade. The charkha
(spinning wheel) became an important symbol
of freedom because it was small; it could come
alive as a sign of resistance and creativity in the
smallest of huts and poorest of families (Shiva
1997: 126).

REFERENCES
Adhikari, J. 2009. Land Reform in Nepal. Problems and
Prospects. Kathmandu: ActionAid Nepal and NIDS.
Adhikari, K. 2014. Tentacled Tactics. The Kathmandu
Post, 21 January, 2014. (http://www.ekantipur.com/
the-kathmandu-post/2014/01/21/related_articles/
tentacled-tactics/258416.html accessed January 22,
2014)
Aljazeera. 2012. The Seed Emergency: The Threat to
Food and Democracy: Patenting Seeds has led to a
Farming and Food Crisis - and Huge Profits for US
Biotechnology Corporations. (http://www.aljazeera.
com/indepth/opinion/2012/02/201224152439941847.
html accessed January 25, 2014)
Bittman, M. 2013. How to Feed the World. New York
Times, October 14, 2013. (http://www.nytimes.
com/2013/10/15/opinion/how-to-feed-the-world.
html?_r=0 accessed June 20, 2014)
CBS. 2013. National Living Standard Survey Report - NLSS
III (2010-11). Kathmandu: Central Bureau of Statistics,
Government of Nepal.

45

Journal of Forest and Livelihood 12(1) October, 2014
CSS Europa. 2014. Campaign for Seed Sovereignty.
(http://www.seed-sovereignty.org/EN/ accessed July
10, 2014).
DeLisi, S. 2011. Setting the Record Straight on Hybrid
Seeds. December 2, 2011. Facebook. (https://www.
facebook.com/notes/scott-h-delisi/setting-the-recordstraight-on-hybrid-seeds/184148695011816)
ETC Group. 2008. Who Owns Nature? Corporate Power
and the Final Frontier in the Commodification of Life.
Communique, Issue 100, November, 2008.
ETC Group. 2011. Who Will Control the Green Economy?
(http://www.etcgroup.org/files/publication/pdf_file/
ETC_wwctge_4web_Dec2011.pdf accessed 21 January,
2014)
FAO. 2013. State of World Food Security. Rome: Food and
Agriculture Organization.
FAO. 2014. Seed Security and Rehabilitation. Rome: Food
and Agriculture Organization. (http://www.fao.org/
agriculture/crops/thematic-sitemap/theme/seeds-pgr/
seed-sys/security/en/ accessed June 30, 2014).
Fuller, S. 2011. Why Monsanto? Nepali Times. Issue #577 04
November, 2011. (http://nepalitimes.com/issue/577)
GRAIN. 2014. Hungry for Land: Small Farmers Feed the
World with Less than a Quarter of all Farm Land.
(http://www.grain.org/article/entries/4929-hungryfor-land-small-farmers-feed-the-world-with-less-than-aquarter-of-all-farmland accessed May 28, 2014).
Gucciardi, A. 2012. Monsanto’s GMO Seeds Contributing
to Farmers’ Suicides every 30 minutes. Natural Society,
April 4, 2012. (http://naturalsociety.com/monsantosgmo-seeds-farmer-suicides-every-30-minutes/ accessed
April 20, 2014)
Guragain, M. 2014. Farmers Again Choose Seeds that Failed.
Republica, 7 June, 2014. http://www.myrepublica.
com/portal/index.php?action=news_details&news_
id=76506.
IRIN. 2012. Analysis: Nepal’s Monsanto Debate Spotlights
Seed Sovereignty. International Regional Information
Networks. (http://www.irinnews.org/report/94611/
analysis-nepal-s-monsanto-debate-spotlights-seedsovereignty accessed July 11, 2014).
Larson, G. and Williams, M. 2013. Rural Institutional
Platform Mobilizes Communities to Become Effective
Partners in Agricultural Innovation in Andhra Pradesh.
Washington DC: The World Bank. (http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/INTARD/Resources/3358071330620492317/8478371-1330712114326/Module1IAP4.pdf accessed May 20, 2014)
Mercola, J. 2012. My First Hand Experience. How GMOs
Cause Farmers Suicide. (http://articles.mercola.com/
sites/articles/archive/2012/04/03/gmo-crops-affectfarmers.aspx accessed July 9, 2014).
Nepali Times. 2011. Going to Seed. Hybrid and GeneticallyModified Seeds May Create More Problems than They

46

Adhikari

Solve. Nepali Times. Issue #577 04 Nov 2011. (http://
nepalitimes.com/news.php?id=18676 accessed on May
15, 2014).
Oryza. 2013. Nepal Imports 504,500 Tons of Rice in FY
2012-13; Up 18% from FY 2011-12. (http://oryza.
com/content/nepal-imports-504500-tons-rice-fy-201213-18-fy-2011-12#sthash.4qr1oKiF.dpuf)
Patterson, M. 2013. Monsanto: The Behemoth That Controls
90 Per cent of Soybean Production. Newsroom. School
of Law, Fordham University. (http://law.fordham.
edu/faculty/30007.htm accessed June 20, 2014).
Prasain, S. 2014. Nepal Imported Agro Products Worth Rs
99.34 Billion Last FY. The Kathmandu Post, 21 May,
2014.
(http://www.ekantipur.com/the-kathmandupost/2014/05/20/related_articles/nepal-imported-agroproducts-worth-rs-99.34-billion-last-fy/263035.html)
Regmi, F.D. 2013. No to Monsanto. Wwoof Nepal. (http://
wwoofnepal.wordpress.com/ accessed May 20, 2014).
Sainath, P. 2010. 17,368 Farm Suicides in 2009. The Hindu,
27 December, 2010. (http://www.thehindu.com/
opinion/columns/sainath/17368-farm-suicides-in2009/article995824.ece accessed April 20, 2014)
Shahi, P. 2012. Crop Failure Fails to Warrant Government’s
Due Attention. The Kathmandu Post, 27 March,
2012.
(http://www.ekantipur.com/the-kathmandupost/2012/03/26/related_articles/crop-failure-failsto-warrant--governments-due-attention/233089.html
accessed May 21, 2014)
Shiva, V. 1997. Biopiracy: The Plunder of Nature and
Knowledge. Cambridge, Mass: South End Press.
Shrestha, G.L. and Upadhyay, M.P. 1999. Wild Relatives
of Cultivated Rice Crops in Nepal. In: R Shrestha and B
Shrestha (Eds.), (pp 72-82). Kathmandu: GEM, Nepal.
The Himalayan. 2013. CG’s Tie-up with Monsanto Sows
Seeds of Foreign Dependence. December 13, 2013.
(http://www.thehimalayantimes.com/fullNews.
php?headline=CG’s+tie-up+with+Monsanto+sows
+seeds+of+foreign+dependence&NewsID=399579
accessed April 12, 2014).
Upadhaya, M.P. and Gupta, S.R. 2000. The Wild Relatives
of Rice in Nepal. In: P.K. Jha, S.B. Karmacharya,
S.R. Baral and P. Lacoul (Eds.), Environment and
Agriculture: At the Crossroad of the New Millennium
(pp.182-195). Ecological Society, Kathmandu, Nepal.
Via Campesina. 2014. The International Peasant’s Voice.
(www.viacampesina.org. accessed July 10, 2014).
Via Campesina. 2010. Peasant and Family Farm-based
Sustainable Agriculture Can Feed the World. Viva
Campesina Views Paper 6. Jakarta, September, 2010.
(http://viacampesina.org/downloads/pdf/en/paper6EN.pdf accessed July 10, 2014).
 Enter your email address to receive occasional updates and previews from The New Atlantis. 
 Why is there a marked divide between Americans and Europeans when it comes to the cultivation and regulation of genetically modified (GM) foods? The United States, which has about 1.4 times as much cropland as the European Union, devotes almost 600 times as much to GM crops; the EU’s total acreage of GM crops, mostly corn grown in Spain, adds up to less than the area of Greater London. This vast difference in production between Europe and the United States reflects their different attitudes toward genetically modified organisms, attitudes that affect consumer preferences and government policies, and that have important political implications for transatlantic trade. Differences in the ways that the two sides regulate GM foods are among the challenges for the ongoing negotiations to establish the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, challenges having to do mostly with European restrictions on genetically modified products from America. 
 But explaining this divide requires going beyond the usual discussion about whether Europe is irrational in its concern about the safety of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) and its insistence on precaution, or about whether America takes excessive risks for the sake of efficiency and profit. These are complex questions, and we can begin to understand how each side answers them only if we look to the underlying cultural and philosophical reasons for the differences between European and American approaches to GMOs — to the different attitudes toward food and eating, technological mastery of land, and the reliability of scientific experts, as well as to more deeply rooted differences in the ways agriculture is practiced on the two continents. Perhaps the most important of these differences concerns the value of local traditions, which Europe sustains in part by resisting innovations that might alter treasured ways of life. 
 Differences Take Root 
 Before describing the historical and cultural roots of the differences between European and American attitudes toward GMOs, it is worth saying a bit about what genetically modified foods are and the reasons they are grown at all. The term “genetically modified organisms” refers to organisms, whether plants, animals, or microbes, that have had their genomes manipulated to contain specific DNA sequences. There are many genetic modification technologies that can accomplish this, with varying degrees of efficiency. Breeding techniques have been used by farmers for millennia to select plants or animals with the best genes for their purposes — but breeding does not directly manipulate DNA in organisms; rather, it changes the prevalence of different kinds of genetic variants in the population. The first modern method for genetic modification employed recombinant DNA technology, in which enzymes are used to cut specific DNA sequences out of one organism’s genome to insert it into the genome of another. The inserted DNA sometimes comes from related species, but can also come from unrelated species. 
 The first genetically modified plant approved for agricultural production was the Flavr-Savr tomato, which had been modified to produce less of the enzyme responsible for the softening of fruit as it ripens. First approved in the United States in 1994, production ceased in 1997 because of high production costs and poor sales. More successful GM varieties soon followed, but they have not been as conspicuously marketed to consumers and retailers as the Flavr-Savr tomato. Rather, they have been designed to appeal to farmers and marketed as more efficient and profitable than non-modified varieties. Because the traits of GM crops are not designed chiefly with consumers in mind, and because the most successful GM crops are plants like soybean and corn that are incorporated into processed foods more than they are purchased fresh by consumers, GM crops have not noticeably changed the ways most Americans buy, cook, and eat their food. And while GMOs have come to dominate the American corn and soybean markets, other staples, such as wheat or oats, are almost entirely GM-free. Other than a few varieties of zucchini and papaya, there are very few GM fruits or vegetables on the market, and only a single genetically modified animal — the AquaAdvantage salmon — has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for human consumption. Nevertheless, according to one estimate, as much as 70 to 80 percent of the foods consumed in the United States contain some amount of GM ingredients. 
 Some of the most successful varieties of GM crops in the United States have been corn and soybeans designed to be resistant to glyphosphate, a herbicide better known by its trade name, RoundUp. The company that produces RoundUp, Monsanto, created genetically engineered varieties of corn, soybean, and a few other crops that would survive being sprayed by the herbicide, allowing farmers to spray their fields extensively with the herbicide to destroy weeds. 
 American farmers have been more reliant on herbicides than Europeans, in part because Americans have moved away from the traditional practice of tillage, or plowing. Among its other advantages, tillage helps to destroy weeds prior to planting, making the use of herbicides less necessary. However, tillage also dries and compacts the soil, and in drier climates like those that prevail in the central United States, this can lead to extensive erosion, as witnessed by American farmers in the catastrophic Dust Bowl conditions of the 1930s. No-till farming and other kinds of conservation tillage, which involve less significant disruption of the soil, were first adopted in the United States in the 1950s, but only really caught on in the 1970s, following the development of herbicides and specialized planting equipment necessary to farm without plowing. 
 In most of Europe, growing conditions have not required the abandonment of the traditional methods of plowing that have been used for centuries. No-till farming is practiced mainly in southwestern Europe and some other areas where climate conditions make it more suitable, although it is very limited. 
 It is unclear what effect the creation of herbicide-resistant GM crops has had on the plowing practices of American farmers. But the rise of herbicide-resistant crops has contributed to the increased useof herbicides by farmers, which has, in turn, given rise to “superweeds” resistant to glyphosphate herbicides. And while European methods of heavy plowing are rooted in tradition, some environmentalists and scientists argue that farmers in Europe will need to reduce the tillage of their fields to preserve soil quality for future generations. 
 So the move toward herbicide-resistant GMOs is more explicable in the case of American farmers under pressure to reduce tillage for the sake of preserving soil quality; GM crops offer a convenient way to deal with the challenges posed by reduced tillage. Compared to previous methods of low-dose selective herbicide chemistries, farmers can now use a simple and forgiving weed-management system that requires fewer rounds of spraying, lower costs, and greater reliability. The persistence, despite the rise of GM crops, of the heavy use of agricultural chemicals in the United States can be attributed, at least in part, to the fact that broad-spectrum herbicides offer a level of convenience that diminishes the incentive to carefully control the amount of chemicals sprayed on the fields. 
 But the influence of GMO technology on farming has not only been to improve productivity; it has also helped to introduce a new economic model of agriculture, one similar to that found in the software industry. The development of genetically modified seeds is a costly, time-consuming process that requires expensive equipment and first-rate researchers, and so seed companies have to ensure high revenue to recoup investments and to gain profits. This business of high volumes and low profit margins is supported by a strong intellectual-property-rights regime; patents on novel seeds ensure that companies can gain a return on their research and development costs. Revenues are collected through payments for licensed seeds, royalty payments from distributors, and sales of additional products such as matching pesticides, which are sometimes offered in package deals together with the core product. Some may argue that this leads to a more productive form of farming that benefits farmers, consumers, and biotech companies. Others might object that it is also a more mechanized, technological way of farming that is an affront to a traditional, bucolic vision of rural life. But in America farming has long been a highly pragmatic and large-scale enterprise. This is even more easily understandable if we compare the average farm size of about 35 acres in the European Union today to the average of 434 acres in the United States, while there are about six times as many farms in the EU. This means that, unlike in America, the average European farm is still very much part of a local community. 
 Culture and Agriculture 
 Over the course of centuries, Europeans have found ways of producing food in confined spaces and in varied and complex geological and climate conditions. Europe’s many varying landscapes have made possible the development of culturally distinct communities and societies that could retain their individual traditions and idiosyncrasies while also conducting lively exchanges with neighbors. Unlike in America, the sense of geographic constraint in Europe helped to give rise to a view of agriculture as part of the beauty of a landscape that bore the imprint of age-old ways of life. 
 In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in Europe, the man-made landscape became the focus of spiritual resistance against the growing technological and industrial mastery over nature that threatened to transform agriculture. This resistance was expressed already by the Romantics and their philosophical predecessors, who extolled the mystical powers of nature and found in the land a source of artistic inspiration. The idea of the land as a garden appears in the writings of Rousseau and Goethe, in the designs of landscape gardens by Hermann von Pückler-Muskau, and in the art of J.M.W. Turner, Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot, Caspar David Friedrich, and others. Nature both benign and powerful was seen as a liberating force, and an inexhaustible source of moral instruction and religious insight. Unlike the mechanically devised geometrical gardens of the aristocratic courts — a physical manifestation of the might of absolute monarchies over land — the cared-for landscape of the pastoral community was seen as a common home and a refuge from political strife. 
 Americans experienced a very different sense of space and landscapes. When the settlers disembarked in the New World, they found seemingly unlimited land and resources. In stark contrast with Europe, where farmers participated in age-old traditions and worked land that had been passed down through the generations, American pioneer farmers came to see the land as a wilderness to be tamed. As Frederick Jackson Turner recounted in his influential work The Frontier in American History (1920): 
 The first ideal of the pioneer was that of conquest. It was his task to fight with nature for the chance to exist. Not as in older countries did this contest take place in a mythical past, told in folk lore and epic. It has been continuous to our own day. Facing each generation of pioneers was the unmastered continent. Vast forests blocked the way; mountainous ramparts interposed; desolate, grass-clad prairies, barren oceans of rolling plains, arid deserts, and a fierce race of savages, all had to be met and defeated. 
 The farm in early America was not the home to a settled people but a sign of the conquest of nature by mobile and entrepreneurial newcomers. From the beginning, therefore, farming has been associated by Americans with the need to win a livelihood from the wilderness, whereas in Europe it has been associated with the cultivation of a landscape to make a home within it. 
 In mid-nineteenth century America, the natural wonders of the frontier were depicted by the Hudson River school of painters and celebrated in the novels of James Fenimore Cooper. Partly because of the way agriculture was practiced by the conquest-oriented pioneers, farming was sometimes portrayed as an intrusion into the natural landscape, not a part of it, and still less the highest form of cultivating it. In the late nineteenth century, the preservation of untouched wilderness became an important goal for the American environmentalist movement, though others would emphasize the conservation of natural resources for human use. The divide between preservationists and conservationists was less significant in Europe, where cultivated land and wilderness were not so strictly separated. 
 These different attitudes toward agriculture and cultivation of land in Europe and America were reinforced in the twentieth century through the ways that each of the two experienced war. The shifting war fronts in Europe, together with famine, looting, and the wreckage of farmland in the world wars left deep marks on the consciousness of rural populations. In Eastern Europe, the destruction of the hinterland was followed by the communist confiscation of land and collectivization of agriculture, crushing once flourishing rural communities. After so much uprooting through war and communism, healing and reconciliation in Europe were only conceivable through efforts to help the rural population restore and retain a life of self-reliance and traditional culture. This European agrarian vision went beyond an idea of land cultivation or setting a level of necessary income; it also sought to ensure that the farmers would not be pressed out from their land by market forces. 
 In Western Europe, certain groups such as the Italian Futurists had fervently glorified technology as a means of establishing a more perfect, engineered society; social ills could be cured or prevented, they believed, with the help of faster, more powerful, and more efficient machines. The Futurists eventually became associated with Italian Fascism, just as similar movements elsewhere fed into National Socialism. But the wars crushed their techno-utopian dreams, confirming earlier criticisms of big industry that the obsession with speed, horsepower, and efficiency was a threat to traditional practices of farming and manufacturing, and to the peaceful rural life these practices sustain. 
 Twentieth-century philosophy in Central Europe, particularly that of Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger and their heirs, identified the modern cultural malaise with the tendency to objectify our natural surroundings and to exploit them, including through technology. This objectification, they argued, led to a radical fracture separating us from each other and from our given physical experience. 
 But whereas the wars instilled in Europeans a sense of technology’s dangers, in Americans they helped to confirm confidence in scientific and technological progress. Large-scale industry had been crucial for Allied victory, especially in World War II, and whereas Europe needed to reconstruct its cities and countryside after the war, America, its mainland untouched, continued its high techno-industrial productivity, including in its food production. 
 While the differences between America and Europe are somewhat simplified here to make the general outlines clearer, they do largely still hold true today. Certainly, some Americans, for instance the writer and farmer Wendell Berry, have criticized the American trend of techno-economic management of land, and there has also been growing demand for local food in place of mass-produced food and for organic food that has been produced through less aggressive methods. But there is little reason to think American agriculture will be fundamentally restructured by these changes. And European agriculture too has shifted toward becoming a mechanized, chemical-intensive, and efficiency-oriented economic activity; it would be a mistake to romanticize the European farmer by portraying him as the principled man living in perfect harmony with nature. But limited space and resources, and the threat of war and regional clashes, have helped to sustain old agrarian traditions and local practices in spite of the general trend toward greater efficiency, and Europe still has a different conception of the farmer and of the idea of stewardship of land than America. 
 Three Arguments About GMO Safety 
 The different experiences of agriculture and technological progress on the two continents are part of the reason that European consumers have on the whole preferred traditional, non-GMO products and have been more skeptical than Americans of the practice of genetically manipulating food, despite the arguments usually made for why GMOs are safe for consumption. There are three arguments usually made for their safety: first, that they are “substantially equivalent” to existing foods; second, that the methods of genetic engineering are little different from those of traditional breeding; and third, that most scientists who study genetically modified organisms believe they are safe. It is worth considering how each of these arguments has been received in Europe. 
 The idea of “substantial equivalence” has guided much of the scientific deliberation on GMOs in the last two decades. It was first articulated in an OECD study in 1993 as the idea that the safety of GMOs can be assessed by comparing them to analogous conventional food products; today this approach still serves as the guiding principle for assessments of GMO safety, including in Europe. The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), established in 2002, has a panel on GMOs consisting of about twenty independent scientific experts who review risk assessments by applicants seeking to demonstrate the safety of a GM product. The EFSA panel examines the genetically modified food for a range of possible toxins, critical nutrients (such as proteins, fats, carbohydrates, and vitamins), molecular characteristics, chemical composition, potential allergenicity, and potential environmental impact. 
 A point of criticism against the doctrine of substantial equivalence is that it does not take into account the ways that genetic engineering might result in unpredictable changes to the whole organism. Inserting DNA into one site in an organism’s genome can result in insertional mutagenesis, a process in which other sites in the genome are disrupted. There is some disagreement among scientists about how dangerous insertional mutagenesis is for crop species. A 2006 review discussed high rates of mutations in genomes of genetically modified soybeans and warned that mutations of this kind “may affect the safety or performance of transgenic crops intended for commercial release” and that “risk assessments typically fail to effectively examine the genetic aspects of transformation.” A more recent study found that the rate of mutation in genetically modified plants is significantly lower than the genetic variation naturally found between cultivars of soybeans. 
 Related to the idea of substantial equivalence is the notion that genetic modification is a simple continuation of the age-old art of selective breeding. However, as Harvard biologist George Wald argued in his 1976 article “The Case Against Genetic Engineering,” the then-new recombinant DNA technology 
 must not be confused with previous intrusions upon the natural order of living organisms: animal and plant breeding, for example; or the artificial induction of mutations, as with X-rays. All such earlier procedures worked within single or closely related species. The nub of the new technology is to move genes back and forth, not only across species lines, but across any boundaries that now divide living organisms, particularly the most fundamental such boundary, that which divides prokaryotes (bacteria and bluegreen algae) from eukaryotes (those cells within a distinct nucleus in higher plants and animals). The results will be essentially new organisms, self-perpetuating and hence permanent. 
 Research on GMOs in subsequent decades have mitigated some of the worst fears expressed in the early days of genetic engineering, but it is still true that, compared to selective breeding, genetic engineering is a more dramatic form of technological power that introduces genes from entirely different species, which have the possibility of interacting with the genome of the organism in unexpected ways. 
 This is not to say that there are no dissenters among scientists. In fact, a 2015 statement by three hundred independent researchers argued that “Claims of consensus on the safety of GMOs are not supported by an objective analysis of the refereed literature.” In part because of the tension between a supposed consensus and the scientists who may challenge it, people who are concerned about the safety of GMOs often question the trustworthiness of institutions investigating GMO safety and the reliability of their assessments. For instance, some criticshave argued that the EFSA scientists are not truly independent and have conflicts of interest that bias their assessments in favor of the GMO producers and that sometimes lead them to dismiss the results of other scientists’ studies showing potential dangers of GM products. 
 A prominent scandal from the late 1990s (that is, before the establishment of the EFSA) involving Hungarian-born biochemist Árpád Pusztai illustrates why many skeptics do not trust the GMO evaluation process. Pusztai was the leader of a three-year publicly funded research program at Scotland’s Rowett Research Institute investigating possible health and environmental hazards of GMO foods. The researchers examined potatoes into which an insecticidal lectin — a protein taken in this case from snowdrop bulbs — had been inserted to increase their resistance to certain pests. The scientists found that rats with dietary exposure to the crops developed a thicker lining of their gut mucosa in the small intestine, potentially limiting their digestive capacity over time and harming their immune systems. 
 Before the study was fully concluded, Pusztai discussed the preliminary results in a short television appearance in 1998, which triggered public outcry and demand for governmental action by many in Britain. Pusztai was suspended from the Rowett Institute, an action that led many, including Pusztai, to raise questions about how scientific institutions handle controversies related to GMOs. Some scientists, for instance from the Royal Society, argued that Pusztai’s public announcement of incomplete experimental results was irresponsible, while his defenders argued that he was subject to a politically motivated cover-up. Pusztai’s research, which was eventually published in 1999 — an action that itself became controversial because of criticisms of the review process and the study’s design — hardly contained conclusive evidence that the GM potato caused harm to humans. But the scientific institutions entrusted with evaluating food safety might have done better to respond to his research and to use it as a starting point for further investigation, rather than treating his claims with such hostility. And it is understandable that Pusztai’s complaint, for instance in a 2002 article, that scientists are often too financially dependent on companies that profit from certain research results, would make the public even more skeptical both of scientists and of producers of GM foods. For instance, Pusztai explained that the Rowett Institute had an agreement with the company developing the potatoes that if the product were to be commercially released “Rowett would share the profits of the enterprise.” 
 It is worth remembering that this controversy occurred toward the end of the decade-long epidemic of BSE, or mad cow disease, a fatal neurodegenerative disease that affected both cattle and humans in the United Kingdom far more than in any other country, and in Europe more than on other continents. While this disease was unrelated to genetic modification (it spread through the use of contaminated animal products in cow feed), it severely harmed public confidence in the safety of the food-supply system. And certain government actions during this time, advised by scientific experts — for instance assuring the public that risk to humans was remote — led many to lose trust in established mechanisms for assessing health risks of intensive farming practices. 
 While a lack of trust in scientific institutions is part of what explains the European public’s skepticism concerning GMOs, there is more to the debate over GM food than science. What is scientifically validated is not necessarily socially acceptable, as is evident from surveys that take consumers seriously, for instance the research of sociologist Claire Marris. Marris’s work shows that while laypeople may have very limited knowledge of biotechnology — which they will often admit — honest conversations with them and intelligible questions about ethical conduct reveal that their understanding is often considerate and nuanced. What consumers demand is not necessarily more information, but a more trustworthy attitude from all parties, including biotech companies and public authorities, whose assurance that GMO foods pose no risks whatsoever sound to many people “disconcerting and untrustworthy,” because new technical advances always involve risks and a degree of uncertainty. Furthermore, many of the consumers’ concerns about GMOs do not stem from having erroneous information, and there is some evidence, Marris writes, that having more detailed technical knowledge about GMOs “makes people more skeptical or polarized, not less.” Policymakers and experts who would address unfavorable public opinion by more science communication forget that “public attitudes are largely shaped by institutional behavior, not by public relation exercises. Thus, instead of focusing on ways to modify public views in order to make them ‘more rational,’ institutions should perhaps pay more attention to their own behavior.” 
 When anti-GMO protesters talk about “Frankenfood,” GMO advocates often interpret it as a hysterical reaction that blows the potential risks out of proportion, failing to hear it as an allusion to the deep ethical dilemmas that are inextricably linked to the promise of progress through mastery of living things. It is a reference to one of the primary motifs of the twentieth century — that technology by itself is no cure for social ills, and that its success and use for human flourishing depend on the extent to which our norms, conduct, and institutions are able to control it and ensure it is used well and wisely. 
 Precautions and Labeling 
 The general European sentiment about how best to ensure wise use of technologies that significantly alter living things may be summed up in a maxim by German philosopher Hans Jonas: “Act so that the effects of your action are compatible with the permanence of genuine human life.” This “imperative of responsibility” — presented as a reformulation of Kant’s categorical imperative — is one way to explain the sentiment behind what in German has come to be known as the “Vorsorgeprinzip” and in English as the “precautionary principle.” Its function in policymaking is to place the burden of proof for the safety of a new product or process on those who wish to produce or import it, requiring them to demonstrate the absence of danger, and forbidding its sale and production until then. 
 This principle has been applied not only for cultural and historical reasons having to do with the failure in parts of Europe in the first half of the twentieth century to exercise precaution about manipulation of life, but also for political and economic reasons. The increasingly integrated market of the European Union has required the harmonization of all member states’ regulations, and the removal of restrictions impeding the flow of goods, services, capital, and labor between them. One effect of this gargantuan task has been that in seeking common ground between the health and safety regulations of the member states, some more risk-averse than others, the most risk-averse countries have sometimes come to set the standard for the rest of the European Union. 
 Thus when the Single European Act went into effect in 1987, setting the aim of creating a single market for the union, it established that the European Commission “will take as a base a high level of protection” in matters concerning health and safety of both the environment and of consumers, and it further specified that action by the European community relating to environmental protection should be based on the principle “that preventive action should be taken.” 
 Perhaps the most significant instance when the precautionary principle was invoked in Europe was in a dispute over GMOs in the late 1990s and early 2000s. In 1998, after the European Commission had authorized a variety of GM maize (corn) despite widespread public resistance, all new applications for GMO authorizations were blocked at some stage in the process, beginning what came to be regarded as the European Union’s de facto moratorium on GMOs. A majority of member states signed declarations stating intentions to block any new authorization of GMOs and demanding that the European Union adopt a new legal framework to regulate them. In one such declaration, five countries called for new “rules ensuring labeling and traceability of GMOs and GMO-derived products” and stated that without these rules, “in accordance with preventive and precautionary principles, they will take steps to have any new authorizations for growing and placing on the market suspended.” Another declaration, by seven more countries, also invoked the precautionary principle, stating that they would not authorize any GMOs “until it is demonstrated that there is no adverse effect on the environment and human health.” 
 In 2003 the United States, Canada, and Argentina filed complaints with the World Trade Organization (WTO) to challenge the EU over its unofficial moratorium, arguing that it violated trade agreements. The WTO ruled in favor of the complainants in 2006, leading to the authorization in the European Union of a number of new GM plants for food and feed, including cotton, maize, rapeseed, soybeans, and sugar beet. However, each application for a GMO, whether for cultivation or for food and feed, faces considerable regulatory hurdles. Even once the European Commission has authorized an application, individual member states are entitled to opt out. Since national governments convey the mistrust of the public, by October 2015, nineteen of the twenty-eight EU nations had submitted requests to opt out of approving the cultivation of MON 810, a variety of GM maize produced by Monsanto and the only GM crop currently cultivated in parts of the European Union. An additional hurdle for the actual sale of GM products for food and feed is that the EU requires all products containing as little as 0.9 percent GMOs to be labeled as containing genetically modified ingredients, facilitating consumers’ preferences for GMO-free products. By contrast, U.S. regulations have been less strict, although many bills for labeling have been proposed at the state level. At the national level, President Obama recently signed into law a bill requiring labeling of GM foods, but the methods of labeling are not clearly specified, leaving room for obscure codes to conceal information; the details, including the specifics of which GM foods will require labeling, will have to be sorted out later by regulators. However, it is worth noting that some U.S. food producers, responding to growing demand among consumers and retailers, have voluntarily begun to indicate whether or not their products contain GM ingredients. 
 La Dolce Vita 
 Why then does precaution dictate Europe’s regulatory framework for GMOs and seem to influence the choices of such a large portion of European consumers? At what point is the absence of hazard to health and environment sufficiently demonstrated for the precautionary principle to have ceased serving its function, especially when many major scientific bodies consider these hazards nonexistent or at least negligible? This brings us back to the role that precaution plays in Europe not merely as a policy tool for slowing the inexorable advance of technology (in case it is not safe and the experts are wrong, both of which are always possible), but also as a cultural disposition that serves to protect a precious way of life. 
 Europeans’ attachment to traditional ways of producing and consuming food and the revulsion many feel toward American agri-giants like Monsanto dates back at least to the resistance toward globalization of food production through chains like McDonald’s, which arrived in Europe in the 1970s and 1980s. In France, for instance, McDonald’s put many local cafés out of business, provoked changes in restaurant layout and food preparation among French competitors, challenged conventional job security in the restaurant business, helped to deskill food-preparation labor, and led farmers to start growing Russet potatoes and bakers to start baking soft uniform buns. In 1999, protesting effects like these, sheep farmer and activist José Bové led a group of men in using axes, saws, and a tractor to destroy a new McDonald’s under construction in southern France, in the process becoming somewhat of a national hero. The impetus for the protest was a trade dispute between the United States and the European Union, although not the one over GMOs. In response to Europe blocking U.S. exports of hormone-induced beef, the United States raised tariffs on European luxury items, such as Roquefort cheese produced from sheep’s milk, including Bové’s sheep. 
 Other less destructive protests have also drawn attention to the wealth of local and traditional food practices that are at risk because of a globalizing economy. When in 1986 Carlo Petrini and his friends launched the Slow Food movement, it prompted a revived enthusiasm for terroir in food and wine — the highly particular environmental conditions that affect the distinctive qualities of a crop. The movement grew out of a protest — a public pasta feast — against the opening of a McDonald’s in the Piazza di Spagna, one of the famous squares in the heart of Rome. Fast food gave rise to its own antidote. The movement has since spread all across Europe and the world and reaffirms a commitment to some of the sweetest things in life: the pleasure of homegrown food as it has been known for generations, the slow pace required for healthy food production and eating, and the joys of conviviality. All these are well known to anyone who travels to Europe and delights in its gastronomic hedonism. 
 The survival of regional food traditions, which both locals and tourists treasure, depends in part on the resistance to economic trends that homogenize food production and consumption. Critics of these trends, including opponents of GMOs, are not necessarily concerned with preserving the most “natural” types of food. This would surely be a pointless effort, particularly in this time after the Green Revolution that has dramatically increased the role of technology in agriculture worldwide. Instead, the European resistance to GMOs and certain other big-business food products is part of a larger attempt to preserve, against the pressures of industrialization, a certain type of hard-won knowledge, the local lore built up around food, and the relationships between producers and consumers necessary to sustain this knowledge. Part of the purpose of the Slow Food movement and of the reinvigoration of local markets is to reconnect producers and consumers not just through trade but through a loose and yet personal involvement in each other’s well-being. 
 In this light, the European stance on GMOs is at heart conservative, in the general sense that it seeks to conserve the wisdom of local and national traditions from a kind of progressivist belief that history moves in linear fashion toward a future in which technological solutions, mass-produced and distributed worldwide through free trade, fix all problems even on the local scale, a kind of progressivism that is hostile to the democratic right to dissent. This European conservatism with regard to food is not anti-Americanism, but a resistance to a leveling of culture and to a disregard for local sentiments and age-old ways of life. 
 That Which Cannot Be Measured 
 In his book The Case Against Perfection: Ethics in the Age of Genetic Engineering (2007), Michael Sandel writes that “Breakthroughs in genetics present us with a promise and a predicament.” While Sandel’s focus is genetic engineering of ourselves, his observation applies also to the genetic engineering of our food, which involves a moral dilemma that scientific safety assessments alone cannot resolve. 
 The promise of genetic modification of food — besides some advantages of no-till farming under certain climate conditions — is the elimination of hunger and malnutrition worldwide through ever-increasing efficiency in food production. For instance, scientists have created specific seed varieties that will target pressing nutrition problems, like Golden Rice for Vitamin A deficiency and gluten-free wheat for celiac disease. However, non-GMO alternatives to some of these problems already exist, such as Vitamin A supplements that have been used with good success in developing regions — and according to the U.N.’s Food and Agriculture Organization, the world already wastes far more food than would be necessary to feed everyone. Nevertheless, to GMO advocates, the opportunities seem unlimited: from field crops and trees, to fruits and vegetables, to animals — all these could potentially be used for the benefit of a growing world population. 
 The predicament of genetic modification of food is how to decide when new innovations serve legitimate purposes and when they merely answer to the latest food frenzy or threaten other, more valuable goods. How can we know where the limitations are? What do we gain, risk, and lose when we intervene in evolutionary processes in a way that circumvents the usual feedbacks from nature in the development of organisms? Techno-progressivism offers no real answers to these questions because it does not allow them to be raised in a serious way: it holds that all technological changes are ultimately steps toward a better future, so concerns about limits are at most temporary obstacles, primarily about safety issues. This way of thinking is similar to what Edmund Burke called the “geometrical” politics of the French revolutionaries, according to which “all local ideas should be sunk” and replaced by a central and unifying goal, no matter the moral price we or our children will have to pay. This utilitarian reasoning, which takes into account only what is measurable — for instance, crop yield, pesticide resistance, nutritional content, market value — disregards the intentions and sentiments of those whose lives are affected. The social and cultural goods that are sacrificed, if they are considered at all, are just collateral damage compensated for by the gain in efficiency and profit. 
 The greatest of these goods that is usually ignored in debates over GMOs is tradition in the sense that Roger Scruton discusses it in How to Think Seriously About the Planet (2012), as a form of knowledge — not about something or about how to do something, but “knowing what to do, in order to accomplish a task successfully, where success is not measured in any exact or fore-envisaged goal, but in the harmony of the result with our human needs and interests.” These needs and interests can include the beauty of a landscape shaped by traditional agricultural practices, the local particularities of food production and cuisine, and the relationships built up over generations between food producers and consumers. So when the discussion about whether or not GMOs should become culturally acceptable to European consumers considers only scientific safety assessments, the complexity of the issue has been reduced to what amounts to a simple geometrical problem. 
 As of this writing, the negotiations between the United States and the European Union over a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership still meet with hostility in Europe, to a great extent because certain U.S. food products, including GMOs, might gain wider access to European markets. But the deeper the trench lines and the greater the focus on policy and science, the less we reflect on the larger questions about the meaning of stewardship of land and about the farmer’s role in nature and in our societies. Historical experiences of land, personal attachments to and conceptions of a good life, culinary heritages — these are not considered relevant factors in debates among bureaucrats. But mutual understanding will depend in part on our ability to clarify for ourselves and for each other our allegiances to the land and our duties to our neighbors. 
 Orsolya Ujj is a political scientist living in Budapest, Hungary. 
 Orsolya Ujj, "European and American Views on Genetically Modified Foods," The New Atlantis, Number 49, Spring/Summer 2016, pp. 77-92. 
 For the last four years, Nebraska organic farmer David Vetter has been testing his corn for a new kind of pollution. Situated right in the middle of corn country, Vetter's 280-acre farm is small compared to those of his neighbors. All around him are farmers growing genetically modified corn. And that poses a problem. Corn is an open-pollinating crop. Wind and insects can carry pollen from a few yards to several miles. 
 Last year, Vetter's organic corn tested positive for genetic contamination. "We've been letting customers who buy in bulk know the situation," says Vetter. "Right now, most of it is still sitting in storage on the farm." 
 Susan Fitzgerald and her husband operate a 1,300-acre farm outside Hancock, Minnesota. Last year, Fitzgerald's 100 acres of organic corn showed evidence of genetic contamination, as did her neighbor's organic corn crop. The pollen had traveled more than 120 feet from another neighbor's farm. Instead of selling her organic corn for approximately $4 a bushel, she had to sell her crop on the open market for $1.67. 
 Vetter and the Fitzgeralds are not alone. Organic farmers are having an increasingly difficult time preventing genetically modified organisms (GMOs) from migrating into their fields. And organic food companies are struggling to ensure the integrity of their products. For consumers who demand organic foods, the alarm bells are ringing. 
 In April, The Wall Street Journal tested twenty food products labeled "GMO free" and found that sixteen of them contained at least traces of genetically modified ingredients; five had significant amounts. One of the companies testing positive, albeit with trace amounts, was Nature's Path Foods, the largest organic cereal company in the world. 
 "We have found traces in corn that has been grown organically for ten to fifteen years," Arran Stephens, president of Nature's Path Foods, told The New York Times in June. "There's no wall high enough to keep that stuff contained." 
 Biotechnology, utilized primarily on large industrialized farms, splices genes from other plant and animal species into seeds to produce a variety of desired traits, including the ability to withstand exposure to pesticides and even to produce their own pesticides. The most popular genetically modified crops grown in the United States are soybeans, corn, cotton, and canola. Approximately 68 percent of all soybeans and 26 percent of all corn is genetically engineered in the United States, according to June statistics from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
 But this is counting only those crops that are designed by genetic engineering, not those that are contaminated by it. 
 How much contamination is taking place on organic fields is an unanswered question. 
 "For certain crops, it is absolutely pervasive," says David Gould, an organic certification specialist. "Virtually all of the seed corn in this country has at least a trace of GMO contamination and often more. Canola is as bad if not worse. Soy is very problematic, too." 
 Other crops may also pose risks. Squashes, sugar beets, tomatoes, and potatoes have been approved for bioengineering. "These are not wide-spread yet," says Gould. "Just give them time, and they'll be a problem, too." 
 Organic Trade Association Executive Director Katherine D'Matteo says there is some misunderstanding about what organic products are. "We've built the expectation that there is a purity in the world, and even the slightest contamination is a disaster," she says. 
 "We're seeing traces appearing somewhat more frequently in organic, but we're not seeing an escalation to high percentages," says John Fagan, CEO of Genetic ID, a firm that tests food for many organic and conventional food companies. "If you compare organic with conventional, it is orders of magnitude cleaner." 
 Genetic contamination can come through the sharing of equipment like combines, elevators, or trucks. And it can also come through seeds. "It is very difficult to find clean seed," says Gould. "Without good seed, we will never be able to produce clean crops." 
 Jim Riddle, Secretary of the National Organic Standards Board (NOSB), encourages farmers to test all organic seeds to ensure they are free of genetically modified ingredients before planting. Thus far, most organic seeds have not tested positive for this type of contamination. But the American Seed Trade Association recently asked the U.S. Department of Agriculture to establish a tolerance level of 1 percent genetic contamination for seed that is labeled nonmodified. 
 "It is a pretty good clue that the seed companies can't manage what they are doing when they ask for a tolerance level," says Vetter. "They've come right out and admitted that they can't guarantee non-GMO seed." 
 The costs associated with trying to keep organic separated from genetically modified seed are mounting. For farmers, it includes buffer zones, cleaning equipment, inspections of crops and processing facilities, and frequent testing. Seed testing costs on average about $10 a bag. After-harvest testing can cost $400 per sample. 
 "A real issue at the moment for organic farmers is the increased cost associated with testing," says Bob Scowcroft, with the Organic Farm Research Foundation. "If you're sharing equipment, does the neighbor have to steam clean his combine? What about the truck and elevator if it's multi-use?" 
 A few years ago, there was little incentive for organic farmers to try to find out whether or not their crops were tainted by genetically modified organisms. Why risk the monetary loss that could result if you discovered your crop was contaminated? But now, most organic farmers are doing some type of testing. 
 "Your buyers are going to find out," says Vetter. "So farmers are going to have to test." 
 Another major concern is the potential for the loss of certification that allows farmers to sell their products as "organic." If an organic crop tests positive, a certifier has to make a judgment call, taking into account the extent of contamination and the farmer's efforts to stop it. The official could pull the farm's certification, or more likely pull organic certification for the contaminated crop, says Riddle, whose board is appointed by the USDA to oversee the implementation of national organic rules. 
 "I do think the NOSB needs to look at the threshold or rejection level issue," says Riddle. "Organic does not mean chemical free or GMO-free, but it means GMOs are not used in the production. Organic farmers are being penalized by the actions of their neighbors. The tolerance level should be very low." 
 While the United States does not have set tolerance levels for organic food, there are some relevant standards in other countries. In Europe, any food with a content of 1 percent or higher of genetically modified ingredients must be labeled as such. In Japan, the rule is 5 percent or higher. In an effort to avoid the labeling requirement, food companies in Japan and Europe are rejecting crops that exceed these thresholds. According to Fagan of Genetic ID, organic companies in Europe and Japan are strict about genetically altered content, with most companies unwilling to accept anything with a 0.1 percent threshold or higher. 
 Organic food grown in the United States is fast becoming a major export. According to the Organic Trade Association, the United States exports more than $40 million in organic goods to the United Kingdom and an estimated $40 to $60 million to Japan each year. The association estimates that U.S. organic exports to Europe are growing by 15 percent per year, and by 30 to 50 percent per year to Japan. 
 Most other countries expect that organic products coming from the United States will be free of genetically modified ingredients. But that situation could change. In 1999, Europe rejected corn chips manufactured by the Wisconsin company Terra Prima because of genetic contamination. The event cost the company hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
 Organic is the fastest expanding sector of the domestic food business--growing a whopping 20 percent every year since 1990. There are 7,800 certified organic farms in the United States, up from 6,600 in 1999, according to the Organic Farm Research Foundation. Organic sales will likely increase from an estimated $5.4 billion in 1998 to more than $9 billion in 2001, according to Datamonitor, the food industry analyst. 
 Organic foods are popular with consumers who prefer natural ingredients and worry about the health hazards of pesticides, synthetic hormones, and other aspects of industrial agriculture. 
 But if consumers cannot be assured that they are getting organic products free of genetically modified ingredients, the market may diminish. 
 In 1997, when the U.S. Department of Agriculture proposed national standards that would have considered genetically modified crops to be organic, nearly 300,000 people submitted comments denouncing the plan. A major selling point of organic foods has been that the standard disallows genetically modified organisms. Many organic food companies, like Nature's Path, Eden Foods, Erewhon, and Gardenburger, tout this claim on their labels. 
 Last December, the organic community roundly hailed the conclusion of a tortuous ten-year process to develop national standards for organic food production. While the final standard explicitly excluded genetically modified crops, it was decidedly vague on the issue of contamination. The rules appear to allow some genetic impurities, although they do not specify how much. The rules state, "The presence of a detectable residue of a product of excluded methods [like genetic alterations] alone does not necessarily constitute a violation of this regulation. . . . The unintentional presence of the products should not affect the status of an organic product or operation." 
 Because of difficulties in ensuring that food is free of genetically modified ingredients, the Food and Drug Administration's new regulations on genetically modified organisms, announced in January, do not allow companies to claim that their products are "GMO-free." Instead, labels will have to say that the food was not produced through bioengineering. 
 The demand for crops that have not been genetically modified has increased dramatically since an unapproved yellow corn called StarLink was found in a taco shell last year. StarLink, which is genetically engineered to contain the pesticide Bt in every cell, had been approved for animal feed but not for human consumption because of concerns about dangerous allergic reactions. StarLink has since been found in nearly 300 consumer products, and the EPA estimates it will take up to four years before StarLink is completely out of the food system. 
 "StarLink has made a big difference in terms of understanding how farm contamination can happen," says D'Matteo. "And it showed how the government didn't have controls in place." 
 In June, StarLink was found in white corn tortilla chips in Florida, according to The Washington Post. "The presence of StarLink in a white corn product illustrates how difficult it is to keep genetically modified crops from spreading," reported the Post on July 4. "White corn is grown and distributed separately from yellow corn, and industry observers said there are no genetically modified varieties. But they also said it has proven impossible to prevent some commingling of conventional and modified, as well as white and yellow, corn. The mixing, they said, could happen at processing plants, during transportation, and during cross-pollination in fields." 
 On July 27, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency announced that it would not establish a tolerance level for StarLink in human foods. This move, opposed by the food industry, effectively bans StarLink from U.S. grocery shelves and mandates testing of corn entering the food supply. 
 Organic farmers are fighting back. Many family farm groups throughout the country are interested in pushing for legislation that would clearly identify the seed maker, rather than the farmer, as liable for contamination. 
 Politicians have introduced bills in the U.S. Congress and more than a dozen states that would require labeling of genetically modified foods and stronger pre-market safety testing requirements. Some of the bills would assign liability to seed companies for damages. 
 "The consumers' right to know what is in the food they eat and how it is made must be protected. The FDA is much too busy protecting the profits of the biotech food companies," says Representative Dennis Kucinich, Democrat of Ohio. 
 The Maine legislature passed a bill in May that would require manufacturers or seed dealers of genetically engineered plants, plant parts, or seeds to provide written instructions to all growers on how to plant, grow, and harvest the crops to minimize potential cross-contamination. The Maine bill is the first of its kind in the country. 
 But the future integrity of organic products may well be decided in the courtroom. There is no case law related to genetically altered crops, and no laws have passed (although several have been introduced at the state and federal level) assigning liability. In the past, U.S. courts have ruled against pesticide companies for pesticide drift. Farmers hope they would do the same for genetic drift. 
 Organic farmers also have been active in lawsuits against the Environmental Protection Agency. One suit, filed in October 1999, demands that the EPA withdraw all genetically modified Bt crops, including StarLink. 
 Genetically modified Bt crops insert an engineered version of a natural soil bacterium, known as bacillus thurengensis (Bt), into the crop. Organic farmers sometimes used Bt in spray form as a last option to deal with certain pests like the corn borer. But many in the scientific community, and the EPA itself, fear that genetically modified Bt crops will speed up resistance to Bt, thereby rendering the natural spray that organic farmers use ineffective. 
 A class action lawsuit filed by farmers who did not grow StarLink seeks compensation for lost export markets associated with the scandal. The lawsuit, filed last December, alleges that StarLink's manufacturer, Aventis, failed to follow the EPA registration for StarLink corn and neglected to take other precautions to prevent StarLink corn from entering the human food supply chain. As a result, the suit claims, there has been widespread contamination of the U.S. corn crop with StarLink, which has in turn resulted in a loss of export and domestic markets for U.S. corn and a depression in U.S. corn prices. The suit, filed in Illinois, seeks compensatory and punitive damages, as well as injunctive relief requiring Aventis to decontaminate all soil, farming equipment, storage equipment, harvest equipment, transportation facilities, grain elevators, and non-StarLink seed supplies to prevent further contamination. 
 Another lawsuit, this one against Monsanto, charges, among other things, that the company failed to test genetically modified seeds and crops adequately before releasing them into the food supply. The lawsuit, filed on behalf of farmers by the Washington, D.C., law firm Cohen, Milstein, Hausfeld, & Toll, also charges that Monsanto, together with other companies, formed a global cartel to fix prices on genetically modified seeds and conspired to restrain trade in the GMO corn and soybean market. 
 Monsanto disputes that the seeds haven't been adequately tested. "This action is another in a series of unsuccessful attempts by veteran antagonists to stop a technology with the potential to improve our environment, increase food production, and improve health," said David Snively, assistant general counsel for Monsanto. "We're confident this suit will be dismissed." 
 The courts won't necessarily work to the advantage of the organic farmers. Many in the organic community are still talking about the Percy Schmeiser case, decided earlier this year in Canada. Monsanto sued Schmeiser for growing Roundup Ready Canola. Schmeiser claimed that he had not purchased the seed and that pollen had drifted from a neighbor's farm. The Canadian court ruled that it didn't matter whether the material drifted or not. Schmeiser, it said, was infringing on Monsanto's patent rights. The court ordered him to pay $105,000 to Monsanto. 
 "If U.S. courts allowed biotech companies to sue organic farmers for selling their contaminated crops, organic farmers could be found liable to pay damages to the contaminating companies. In essence, this would amount to requiring organic farmers to pay for the nuisance caused by these biotech companies," wrote San Francisco attorneys Robert Uram and Giselle Vigneron in a recent analysis of the case. 
 Farmers like Vetter and the Fitzgeralds are going to extraordinary measures to prevent the contamination of their crops. The Fitzgeralds have planted mostly wheat and soybeans, and have tried to use buffers when their neighbors planted genetically modified corn. 
 Vetter tried to stagger his planting time with his neighbors'. "Because we knew the chances of cross-pollination were great, we tried to offset planting dates with our neighbors," Vetter says. "We hoped that they would plant early, and we waited as long as we could to plant." 
 Susan Fitzgerald hopes that organic farmers can work together with conventional farmers interested in planting crops that have not been genetically altered. 
 "We don't want to make enemies," she says. "But we want to defend our right to grow GMO-free crops." 
 Ben Lilliston is the communications coordinator of the Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy in Minneapolis. He is the co-author, along with Ronnie Cummins, of "Genetically Engineered Foods: A Self-Defense Guide for Consumers" (Marlowe & Company, 2000). 
 The Progressive Inc. publishes The Progressive magazine plus Progressive.org and Public School Shakedown. 
 Take action against corporate greed, learn new ways to reduce your impact on the planet, and learn about green products you never knew existed. 
 George Naylor has been growing non-GMO corn and soy on his Iowa farm since 1976. He talked to Green America editor-in-chief Tracy Fernandez Rysavy about his fight to stay GMO-free. 
 Green America/TRACY: Why did you decide to go GMO-free? 
 George Naylor: I chose not to raise GMOs, period. I just refused to buy products where corporations are messing around with the building blocks of life with their profit motive. Doing so without taking into account the environmental and health consequences is wrong. 
 3.9 billion years of evolution provided us with enough diversity that we shouldn’t have to try to go against the principles of ecology to produce crops. On the other hand, my just raising and relying on corn and soy isn’t a truly sustainable thing either. I’m always looking for some way to do something different. I’m going to have to take the plunge and decide how much income I can live with and whether I can grow something else in a different way. 
 TRACY: Has finding non-GMO seed been a challenge for you? 
 George: Yes, but you can find it. I rely on one company for very good seed, but more are offering non-GM every year. 
 As for soy, since 95 percent or more is engineered to be Roundup Ready, the various companies are not putting research or their best genetics into creating conventional varieties. The choices are very slim and often not good ones. 
 George Naylor has farmed GMO-free corn and soy in Iowa since 1976. Photo by Chris Henning. 
 TRACY: Do you receive a premium for growing non-GM crops? 
 George: I’ve gotten a premium for non-GMO corn and soy. With corn, I don’t actually need a premium [to make ends meet]. My non-GM corn yields as good or better than my neighbor’s GM corn. Non-GM soy doesn’t yield as well due to the seed and a much bigger problems with weeds. So the premium does help with that. 
 I’ve been receiving a soy premium for four to five years because of consumer demand in Europe. European companies turn my soy into non-GM soy meal and soy oil. There’s enough clarity in the market that European consumers want livestock products from non-GM feed. 
 TRACY: What do you hear from other farmers about their experiences with GMOs? 
 George: I’ve heard a lot of anecdotal evidence where farmers are now asking for conventional seed varieties because they’re paying through the nose for GMOs, and those GMOs are not working. They’re getting superweeds. New varieties of GM corn were supposed to combat corn rootworm, but it only took a few years before rootworm became resistant, so the farmers are paying for this trait that doesn’t work anymore. It’s dubious whether it worked well in the first place. 
 Big companies advertise products with same kind of misrepresentation that any other corporation advertises consumer goods. For instance, Monsanto, when it brought out seeds with rootworm resistance, had pictures in magazines where someone was holding up one corn plant with scrawny roots and another that had beautiful root systems. It implied that if you didn’t buy Monsanto corn, you’d end up with the scrawny root plant. That was totally misrepresenting the truth. 
 I think farmers are wising up now. It’s dawning on them that they are paying a lot to Monsanto and Dupont, Syngenta and Dow, for features that aren’t working. 
 TRACY: Have any of the farmers you know run into the Monsanto “seed police”? 
 George: My seed cleaner, the guy that cleans my soy seed that I save from year to year, has implied that he’s aware of Monsanto people following him around. Monsanto forbids farmers from saving its soy seed. So if it finds evidence that a seed cleaner is cleaning Roundup Ready seed to be used again, it would pursue a lawsuit. 
 TRACY: How big of a problem is GMO contamination, from where you sit? 
 George: My non-GM corn is right across the fence from my neighbor’s GM corn, so it’s clear there is going to be some contamination. If I’m going to continue to market my corn as non-GM, I definitely have to worry about contamination from my neighbor. Corn pollen can blow for miles. 
 You have to worry about contamination throughout the whole system. One year, I was going to raise soy for a company that processed it here to send to Japan for food products. I had picked a variety that I knew would do well. Before planting time, when I was supposed to get my seed delivered, the seed company said we can’t find enough seed that isn’t already contaminated with Roundup Ready. I had to pick another. The choices weren’t as good. The yield was terrible, and my premium didn’t make up for the yield loss at all. 
 Within the bigger system, contamination can happen. Seed companies won’t guarantee the purity of their non-GM seed. They have done what they can to make sure it is non GM, but they won’t guarantee it. 
 So far, I haven’t had any crops rejected by the people who buy my corn and soy. But I know farmers who have had crops rejected by the same buyers due to contamination. 
 TRACY: What about superweeds? Are the GMO farmers in your area having issues with those? 
 George: Oh, yeah. It’s not as pronounced as in the southern US or in places where they’ve done a lot of notill farming and used Roundup as a burn down. Roundup used to kill virtually every green plant in the field except the GMO crop, but now farmers are having to add more chemicals to their spray tanks to combat the weeds that escape Roundup. 
 When you raise just one crop on same piece of land, you’re encouraging the pests to come back with a vengeance. It’s an unecological approach to agriculture. 
 And when the unecological effects come about, the biotech companies get to sell more products and pesticides to deal with that problem. Biotech companies now have products in the pipeline that will not only be resistant to Roundup but to 2, 4-D and dicamba. Those two herbicides present other terrible problems for farmers. Pesticide drift, especially with dicamba, and its potential to hurt other crops is huge. 
 With traditional herbicides, you have a small window in which to spray crops at the right time to kill weeds. Herbicide won’t kill weeds if they get too big. But later on in the season, you might get a whole new flush of weeds and can’t spray again [because it’ll harm the crops]. So you try to spray when weeds are small but late enough that the crop will canopy over and prevent new weeds. 
 With the Roundup Ready system, Roundup will kill weeds whether they’re small or big, so there’s a bigger window in which to spray a hell of a lot of acres. Some farmers will think they can prosper by farming more and more acres this way. 
 What this does is intensify competition between farmers. Basically, the farmers that are willing to do the most unecological things are going to win competition for land. That means fewer farmers and fewer ecological farmers. And a total loss of biodiversity. Factory-farm-raised livestock depends on corn and soy meal. Processed foods depend on corn starch and soy protein and vegetable oil. So as long as the system cranks out feed as cheap as it can, that’s going to encourage more of the same—more factory farmed livestock production. 
 Farmer prices are based on supply and demand. Big agribusiness is expanding supply all over the world. So you can see we’ll be in a farm crisis again where prices of corn and soy do not meet cost of production. Anybody who’s invested in the idea that prices will stay stable will be in big trouble. Every food product price is somewhat tied into every other one. The collapse of the most basic food items will bring down all food product prices. 
 I’m hoping that consumers will become as informed as those in Europe and start saying they don’t want GMO food. They will recognize they’ve been buying inferior products that have huge consequences on our environment and our society. They will also demand better public policy. 
 TRACY: How hopeful are you that this could happen? 
 George: I think there’s some good signs that people are getting educated. The campaigns to label GMO crops have educated a lot of people. A friend of mine used to say the truth will set you free. 
 We recently posted a couple social media graphics about reasons not to buy from Amazon, during the holidays, “Prime Day”, or any other time of year. Not buying from a giant online store is not a surprising perspective from Gre... 
 Composting is no longer just a way to reduce the amount of organic waste headed for the landfill—although that’s a great benefit. Farmers and gardeners who use regenerative agricultural practices know that composting is key to building healthy so... 
 Back to the Vote With Your Dollar Toolkit More than 2 million children in Ghana and Cote d’Ivoire work in hazardous conditions growing cocoa, the main ingredient in chocolate, according to the US Department of Labor1. While some companies have b... 
 Members of our Green Business Network are certified businesses that have earned Green Business Certification. Review all of our GBN Members. 
 Together, we can protect the world's most vulnerable people and our precious planet. 
 TORONTO – The discourse surrounding a new genetically modified crop is heating up. 
 The National Farmers Union is protesting the possible introduction of genetically modified (GM) alfalfa into eastern Canada, saying the crop jeopardizes the entire organic farming industry. 
 On Wednesday around 100 protesters gathered in Kitchener, Ont., shouting “no way to GM hay!” as members of the Canadian Seed Trade Association (CSTA) held a workshop to discuss GM alfalfa. 
 The CSTA is hoping to develop a plan where GM alfalfa and organic alfalfa can coexist. 
 Full-grown alfalfa is a high-protein feed for pigs, poultry, dairy cows, beef cattle and lambs and is used to increase the nutrients in soil. 
 In order to be certified organic, foods cannot be produced with genetically modified crops and chemical sprays. 
 Critics argue that organic crops and GM crops cannot coexist, as cross-pollination of GM alfalfa to organic crops is inevitable – making organic certification impossible. 
 Phil Woodhouse, president of the National Farmers Union Grey County Local 344 said the CSTA’s claim that it can prevent GM alfalfa from contaminating non GM alfalfa is “utterly absurd.” 
 “The consensus among the food scientists is that once it’s [GM alfalfa] out there, it will inevitably contaminate the entire seed supply,” said Ted Zettel, from the Canadian Organic Federation. 
 But many, including farmers in the U.S. who are already producing GM alfalfa, insist coexistence is possible. 
 “I have been able to do it, and I think there are a lot of farmers in my area in Washington State who have been able to do it,” said American hay farmer Laura Schlenker. 
 Coexistence might require the organic farming industry changing their definition of “organic.” 
 If GM alfalfa is commercialized, “the organic sector may be forced into a situation where they have to change their threshold,” said Rene Van Ackler, professor in the University of Guelph’s department of plant agriculture. 
 The organic farming industry may have to allow some GMOs in, reversing their current zero tolerance policy. 
 The crop at the centre of this debate is called “Roundup Ready” alfalfa – Monsanto’s herbicide tolerant, GM alfalfa.In the U.S., the crop has already been deregulated and is yielding profits. 
 “Companies that will commercialize the seed, they could do it today,” said Stephen Denys from the CSTA. “What they’re doing however is respecting the needs of the different groups in the marketplace saying ‘okay let’s try and put a coexistence plan together before we bring this to the market’.” 
 Forage Genetics International is the company that would see the Monsanto-patented crop in eastern Canada. 
 And to be sure, money plays a huge role in the issue. 
 One acre of conventionally-grown alfalfa costs $20 to maintain, an acre of GM alfalfa costs around $8 to maintain. 
 Money lost is also a concern. Canada exports $29-million worth of alfalfa each year, often to countries, such as Japan,where genetically modified organisms are banned. 
 In western Canada, alfalfa seeds are largely sold to foreign markets. 
 “If Roundup Ready alfalfa seed is found, the seed is shipped back at my cost and my contract is cancelled with my European buyers,” said Kurt Shmon, a Manitoba alfalfa seed producer. “I’m done.” 
 As such, all groups involved agree that no GM alfalfa should be used in western Canada. 
 East of Manitoba, however, numerous plans are being considered. 
 One idea for coexistence is to establish a minimum distance between fields. Another would be zoning parts of eastern Canada for GM alfalfa producers, keeping other zones GM-free. 
 Regardless of what ideas come out of the CSTA workshops, the federal government would have the final say. 
 “There will be a panel put together, there’s the outline for that already, that will adjudicate whether or not this is in thebest interest of Canada based on scientific investments,” said Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz. 
 With files from Global National’s Jennifer Tryon and the Canadian Press 
 Exclusive by Ramona Duminicioiu, agrobiodiversity campaigner at Eco Ruralis. 
 2015 marks a breaking point for the country with the longest GMO cultivation history in Europe. According to the GMO Registry, published by the Environmental Protection Agency (Ministry of Environment) only 2,5 hectares of GM maize MON810 were cultivated for commercial purposes, by only one cultivator – a research station from Neamt county. Despite the intense lobby of the large farmers unions and corporations like Monsanto, Syngenta, Pioneer, Romanian farmers have given up completely on growing GM maize. 
 Picture 1. Map of Romania indicating the Neamt county where 2,5 hectares of MON810 maize were cultivated in 2015. Source: The GMO Information Center InfOMG, based on data from Environmental Protection Agency – Ministry of Environment. 
 Why is this important? 
 In 1998, Romania was the first country in the geographical Europe to introduce GM crops. Between 1998 and  2007, Romania officially cultivated a Round-up Ready soy owned by Monsanto. In 2006, the GMO (soy) surface areas reached almost 140 000 hectares, a record still unsurpassed by any other country on the continent. 
 Politically, the Romanian government embraced a GMO agenda, ignoring public opinion. Two former ministers of Agriculture with ties to Monsanto, praised the GM soy through their mandates. Valeriu Tabara – minister of agriculture between 1994-1996 and 2010-2012 worked as director of research projects funded by Monsanto, while Stelian Fuia – minister of agriculture in 2012 – was a marketing director for Monsanto Europe. 
 When Romania joined the EU in 2007, it was forced to change its GMO policy, banning the GM soy and authorizing only and whatever was approved in the EU. The MON810 maize, the only GMO authorized for commercial growing in the EU, was the only real option. Initially pitched as a great opportunity for profit, farmers instead have turned out to be disappointed by it. 
 Picture 2. MON810 maize crop from Braila county, cultivated in 2012 – showing the poor quality and very low productivity of the GMO maize. Source: The GMO Information Center InfOMG. 
 Monsanto offered MON810 seeds for free to Romanian farmers 
 The very low productivity of the MON810 maize made farmers drop out from the GMO frenzy. Year after year, the number of growers was shrinking. And then Monsanto started to offer the MON810 seeds to farmers for FREE, in a desperate attempt to maintain production of the only GMO available on the European market. 
 Yet still, this marketing efforts shows that Romanian farmers don’t want Monsanto’s GMOs, even if they are for free. No farmer decided to cultivate the GM maize in 2015. Only a research station from the North-East of the country has grown any amount – a meager 2,5 hectares. 
 Picture 3. Invoice from Monsanto to a Romanian farmer, from 2012, for selling MON810 GM maize seeds, showing no price. 
 GMO Field trials 
 Romania has authorized GMO field trials since 2007. Companies such as Monsanto, Pioneer, Limagrain, Euralis, Syngenta were amongst the main owners of the GMOs cultivated for testing purposes. In 2015, several GM maize hybrids and one GM plum fields trials are grown by different research stations around the country. 
 Picture 4. Graphic showing the dramatic decrease of number of GMO commercial cultivators in Romania. Source: The GMO Information Center InfOMG, based on data from Environmental Protection Agency – Ministry of Environment. 
 Picture 5. Graphic showing the decline of GMO surfaces cultivated with GMO commercial crops in Romania. Source: The GMO Information Center InfOMG, based on data from Environmental Protection Agency – Ministry of Environment. 
 Considering this unprecedented situation with the commercial crops, will the Romanian government finally admit the failure of the economic argument for the GM maize and impose a ban on this unnecessary and risky crop? 
 What are the viability and sustainability issues with milk in two parts of Europe quite far from each other – Ireland and Romania? Stuart Miekle has spent many years in both places, working with dairy farmers. Here he gives his perspective. […] 
 Austrian GBI Consulting to put place the country’s National Rural Development Program (NRDP) […] 
 Landgrabber attends ARC2020 panel discussion with people whose land he wants to grab […] 
 We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with this. OKMore information 
 New varieties of genetically engineered crops thrive in the world's most isolated landmass 
 Just beyond the defunct Koloa Sugar Mill on the Hawaiian island of Kauai's south shore are acres of cornfields that have sprouted over the past decade in a state made famous by its pineapples, bananas and sugarcane crops. Slightly out of place in the Aloha State, they otherwise look quite conventional, although in fact they are not: The crop is among a bounty of others in the state that are grown from seeds that have been genetically engineered or modified (GM) to produce sturdier plants able to withstand weather and disease as well as thrive in the face of insects and chemicals sprayed on them to kill destructive weeds. 
 In front of one plot of corn stalks is a red and white sign warning, "Danger: pesticides. Keep out." Tacked to it is a list containing 15 chemicals that may have been applied to the crop. In this case, the chemicals circled are the herbicides pendimethalin (brand name: Prowl), dicamba (Banvel) and atrazine, the latter of which is banned in the European Union (E.U.) because of its link to birth defects in frogs that live in groundwater contaminated with it. 
 I pass these corn fields every day when I go to the beach to go swimming," says Marty Kuala, 68, a 36-year resident of the town Koloa who worked in a plant nursery (that grew native plants such as naupaka, a’ali’i, and naio) in 2005.  "It's kind of a new thing that we're starting to see these fields [of genetically modified or engineered crops] all over the place. GMOs [genetically modified organisms] are growing in the Mahaulepu area on Kauai's south shore and even in the large populated areas of Lihue, our biggest town." 
 This year, only 1.67 million tons of raw sugar were produced, nearly one million tons less than just a decade earlier; only 13,900 acres (5,625 hectares) in the state were set aside for pineapples in 2006 [the latest year for which pineapple stats are available) compared with a whopping 76,700 acres (31,039 hectares) in 1991. 
 The other crops vying for state land: flowers and nursery plants, macademia nuts, coffee, milk, algae, tomatoes, bananas and papaya. 
 Genetically modified food has been a source of debate since hitting the market in 1994. The E.U. had banned the imports of GM crops for 20 years, however in 2006 the World Trade Organization (WTO) ruled that the ban violated international trade rules. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has deemed it safe and has so far declined to limit or block the burgeoning industry. 
 The extraordinary biodiversity (and, so, native plants competing for space and nutrients), along with the intractable problem of invasive species would seem to make Hawaii the least likely place to grow controversial crops, risking their uncontrollable spread. But scientists seed companies and some scientists believe say the benefits outweigh the risks of damage to the fragile ecosystem, most notably Hawaii's crop-friendly moderate year-round climate—an average of 75 degrees Fahrenheit (24 degrees Celsius)—and its open acreage. And over the past 10 years, Hawaii has become the locus for genetically modified crop field trials and a microcosm for the controversies over the safety of growing and eating transgenic food. 
 To date, Hawaii's fertile soil has nourished more than 2,230 field trials of genetically modified (GM) crops, including corn, soybeans, cotton, potatoes, wheat, alfalfa, beets, rice, safflower, and sorghum—more than any other state. A total of 4,800 acres (1,940 hectares) of such crops now grow throughout the state, some 3,500 (1,415) of which are corn and soybeans, 1,000 acres (405 hectares) of which yield genetically engineered papaya, and the remaining 10 percent are field trials for new potential GM crops. "Hawaii is ideally suited for field trials and seed production, because of the climate and the ability to grow corn and soybeans 52 weeks a year," says Cindy Goldstein, a spokesperson for Johnston, Ia.–based Pioneer Hi-Bred International (a subsidiary of DuPont) in Waimea, Kauai. Her company has been producing GM corn and soybeans in Hawaii since the mid-1990's, when the FDA approved the crops for commercial sale. 
 Goldstein says that seed companies can harvest three to four yields of corn per year in Hawaii compared with only a single yield in the continental U.S. thanks to its temperate tropical climate. Other parts of the world with similar climates may also be well suited for corn and soybean seed production. But Goldstein notes that Hawaii has the added advantage of extensive amounts of available land due to the downturn in sugar and pineapple over the past decade, a victim of skyrocketing production costs compared with lower rates in developing countries. 
 As a result, many U.S. seed companies, including Pioneer Hi-Bred, Monsanto and Syngenta, have turned the Islands into a sprawling living nursery for GM corn seed. Genetically engineered corn seed is now the top crop in Hawaii, comprising 92 percent of the state's GM seed industry valued at $97.6 million for the 2006 to 2007 season. 
 "Genetically engineered crops can actually help our environment, help our economy, and secure jobs for our agricultural workers," says Ching Yuan Hu, associate dean of research at the University of Hawaii at Manoa's College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources. Hu is quick to point out, however, that he only supports the development of GM crops in which cross-pollination with non-GM crops can be prevented to ensure that engineered traits will not dilute the gene pool of conventional crops, thereby causing target species to develop resistance. 
 The university is currently engineering seeds for disease-resistant bananas, a new variety of papaya, and Spanish lime—plants that Hu deems safe. Hu notes that it generally takes from seven to nine years to bring a new GM seed to market. 
 But not everyone is on the GM bandwagon. Critics worry that the pests genetically engineered crops were originally created to withstand will eventually build resistance to the crop, and that the engineered traits will spread virulently via the wind, birds and bees. 
 "One of the biggest concerns with growing crops like Bt [Bacillus thuringiensis] corn [engineered to produce the pest killer, Bt, which has been used for decades by organic farmers to control crop-eating insects] is that you're putting insects under the greatest selection pressure to become resistant to Bt, a natural insecticide," says Bill Freese of the Center For Food Safety, an environmental advocacy group in Washington, D.C., that promotes alternatives to unsustainable food technologies. He adds that if insects become resistant to this natural pesticide, organic farmers may lose one of their best and safest antipest weapons. 
 "The broader implications of growing GM crops is that it will create unwanted genetic material and traits in a wider and wider swath of major crops," such as spreading herbicide tolerance or pest resistance into wild relatives and then outward from there, Freese adds. 
 Conventional Hawaiian papayas have already come under scrutiny by organic farmers and environmental organizations in Hawaii for "genetic drift"—crops grown from non-GM seeds that test positive for being GM. In response, South Korea stopped buying papayas from the island of Hawaii, and Hawaiian papaya farmers who ship to Japan now have to test their trees for contamination and certify that they're "clean". In other words, these countries don't trust the genetic integrity of Hawaii's "non-GM papayas," which in turn has economically harmed many of the islands organic papaya farmers, and can lead to them losing their organic certification. 
 There have also been questions about the safety of genetically engineered foods. In Europe, the European Food Safety Authority determines whether new GM products are safe for consumers and the environment. That view is then considered by the 27 member states, which make the final decision. It requires all genetically modified foods to be labeled, and, currently, only one genetically modified crop—Bt corn—has been approved to grow in the E.U. (mainly in Spain, but also in Germany, the Czech Republic and Portugal). 
 The FDA does not require GM foods to be labeled as such, insisting that studies have shown it to be as safe as foods produced using conventional breeding techniques. It is the seed companies that conduct the safety tests for new GM food products, passing the safety and nutritional information to the FDA for the agency's scientific evaluation. 
 "I haven't seen sufficient data from a legitimate organization without a conflict of interest to show that the stuff is healthy or safe," says Lorrin Pang, a public health specialist in Maui, and a consultant to the World Health Organization on tropical diseases, "I haven't seen data that says it isn't, either—but I'm from a drug and vaccine background that operates on the precautionary principle: You don't give something to the public until it's proven safe." 
 Pioneer Hi-Bred's Goldstein insists that foods made with genetically modified ingredients are safe, noting that they have been in the U.S. marketplace since 1996 and that "over a trillion meals containing biotech ingredients have been consumed in the U.S. with no documented negative health impacts." 
 The genetically modified seed biz may be booming in the 50th state, but not everyone is pleased about it. The Hawaii County Council (county legislature) last month voted to ban the growth of genetically modified taro (a tropical plant whose potato-like root is a staple of the Hawaiian diet) and coffee on the Big Island (Hawaii). The reason: pollen from GM crops could contaminate the non-gm varieties and destroy farmers' livelihoods. The concern seems to be greater with these products, because they’re specialty crops commonly grown on the Islands, as opposed to corn, raising the possibility of cross-pollination. 
 There is also an emotional element to banning GM taro. According to legend, the taro plant originated when a child of the gods was born lifeless. From the child’s grave sprouted the first taro plant, forever casting it as a sacred subsistence food and an ancestor to native Hawaiians. 
 Despite the hoopla, Carol Okada, manager for the Plant Quarantine Branch of Hawaii's Department of Agriculture, says the business is here to stay and will still be booming in Hawaii 10 years down the road.  "Even though it's controversial here," she says, "the [GM] seed industry is now the No. 1 industry for us and it is very important in terms of the economy, dealing with invasive species, and giving farmers choices." 
 The bottom line: Hawaii may be the GM crop test capital of the world, but the debate over biotech foods is far from over. 
 Robynne Boyd began writing about people and the planet when living barefoot and by campfire on the North Shore of Kauai, Hawaii. Over a decade later and now fully dependent on electricity, she continues this work as an editor for IISD Reporting Services. When not in search of misplaced commas and terser prose, Robynne writes about environment and energy. She lives in Atlanta, Georgia. 
 Genetically Modified Maize: Doctors' Chamber Warns of "Unpredictable Results" to Humans 
 Demand for long-term studies - No release of transgenic species in nature 
 The Viennese Doctors' Chamber warns of the possible dangers resulting from genetically modified organisms. The impact on beneficial organisms and livestock and therefore on humans is still not really predictable, emphasizes Piero Lercher, the consultant on environmental medicine in the Viennese Doctors' Chamber. This was prompted by the planned release of a transgenic maize variety which, amongst other things, produces an insecticide.**** 
 In agriculture, genetic engineering, as opposed to traditional cultivation, goes beyond natural species boundaries by introducing specific genes from other organisms into a particular genome. 
 If such genetically manipulated organisms are released into nature they can hardly be controlled and are also irretrievable. "They represent a substantial risk to the biological balance of nature", Lercher warns. 
 The effects on human health are also undefined. There are hardly any study results and certainly no long-term data, therefore for Lercher "the principle of precaution should be applied". 
 The current legal uncertainties should not be cause for imprudent decisions. Lercher: "Hardly anybody knows that the EU Commission can be committed to grant permission if there is no qualified majority for or against in the council." The right for health and sustainable integrity must be higher in terms of responsibility towards future generations. 
 Also the fact that, as in the current case, the decision to authorize the genetically manipulated maize species "Maize 1507" from the seed company Pioneer Hi-Bred International, was passed on to the Council of Ministers by the EU Commission shows that indecisiveness prevails as possible effects on environment and health cannot be predicted to date. 
 The Viennese Doctors' Chamber therefore demands: 
 Long-term analyses (over a period of at least 30 years) must be made in regard to nutritive, anti-nutritive, toxic and allergenic contents to establish unintended changes caused by the genetic modification. 
 Research work on genetically manipulated organisms in both plant breeding and for the development of innovative agents must be performed in hermetically sealed research centres. The release of transgenic species in nature must still be strictly opposed as the results can neither be estimated nor reversed. 
 The necessity to register new transgenic species (e.g. a new type of maize) must be economically and scientifically corroborated and requires a wide acceptance by the majority of consumers. 
 The prohibition of the release of transgenic species that has been valid until now should be maintained by the people and institutions involved in the registration and decision process. 
 It must be clearly defined who is liable for possible damages and direct and indirect consequences to health by genetically manipulated organisms which have been released. 
 Genetically Modified Maize: Doctors' Chamber Warns of "Unpredictable Results" to Humans 
 The UK's environment minister says GM crops will help combat hunger in developing countries. But Owen Paterson is wrong 
 Last week we heard that Owen Paterson, the UK's environment minister, is claiming that GM crops are necessary to help address hunger in developing countries, and that it would be immoral for Britain not to help developing countries to take up GM. Millions of small-scale farmers in Africa would disagree. African farmers and civil society have repeatedly rejected GM crops, and asked their governments to ban them. 
 Paterson does not appear to understand the complex realities and challenges of farming in Africa. Nor does he seem to grasp the limitations of GM crops. He fails to recognise that farmers in Africa already have effective approaches to seed and agriculture, which are far more environmentally and farmer-friendly than GM. Most of all, he fails to acknowledge the devastating impact that GM crops will have on African farmers and farming systems. 
 In the UK, Africa is often talked about as a failing continent where the hungry apparently wait around for northern benefactors to save us. Talk of Africa seems to imply that we have little or no food production, that our farmers are clueless, our seed unproductive. We won't go into how patronising and insulting this attitude is. Instead, we will focus on how this failure to acknowledge African farming systems and seed is being used to wipe them out. 
 Traditional African farming systems have developed an incredible diversity of seed varieties, which are able to deal with the multiple challenges of farming. Seed breeding is a complex art, and scientists who really listen and engage will realise that African farmers have a vast amount of ecological knowledge. Having many different types of seed – bred for their flavours and better nutrition, and which have evolved with local pests and diseases and are adapted to different soils and weather patterns – is a far better strategy of resilience than developing a single crop that is bound to fail in the face of climate change. 
 It is a myth that the green revolution has helped poor farmers. By pushing just a few varieties of seed that need fertilisers and pesticides, agribusiness has eroded our indigenous crop diversity. It is not a solution to hunger and malnutrition, but a cause. If northern governments genuinely wish to help African agriculture, they should support the revival of seed-saving practices, to ensure that there is diversity in farmers' hands. 
 But GM crops pose an even greater threat to Africa's greatest wealth. GM companies make it illegal to save seed. We have seen that farmers in North America whose crop was cross-pollinated by GM pollen have been sued by the GM company. About 80% of African small-scale farmers save their seed. How are they supposed to protect the varieties they have developed, crossed and shared over generations from GM contamination? This will be a disaster for them. 
 Paterson refers to the use of GM cotton in India. But he fails to mention that GM cotton has been widely blamed for an epidemic of suicides among Indian farmers, plunged into debt from high seed and pesticide costs, and failing crops. 
 Paterson also refers to the supposed potential of GM crops developed to be drought-tolerant. These crops are not yet on the market, and we don't know if they ever will be. The only two varieties of GM that have been sold in the past 15 years are resistant to a particular type of pest and a particular type of herbicide. Ask farmers if stalk borers or weeds are a cause of hunger in Africa, and they will laugh at you. 
 Instead of waiting for expensive GM solutions that may never arrive – and will ruin us if they do – we have worked with communities who were able to produce surplus food in times of drought by returning to their traditional varieties. A long-term study (pdf) in Ethiopia showed that crops fare much better in an environment where soil and water is conserved in composted land than on land that is pumped full of fertiliser and imported seeds. Communities increasingly understand that modern seeds often fail in these times of changing climates and unpredictable weather. The only way to ensure real food security is to support farmers to revive their seed diversity and healthy soil ecology. 
 As Esther Bett, a farmer from Eldoret in Kenya, said last week: "It seems that farmers in America can only make a living from GM crops if they have big farms, covering hundreds of hectares, and lots of machinery. But we can feed hundreds of families off the same area of land using our own seed and techniques, and many different crops. Our model is clearly more efficient and productive. Mr Paterson is wrong to pretend that these GM crops will help us at all." 
 •Million Belay is co-ordinator of the Alliance for Food Sovereignty in Africa. Ruth Nyambura is advocacy officer of the African Biodiversity Network, which last year co-released the film Seeds of freedom 
 In Guatemala, indigenous communities prevail against Monsanto - Waging Nonviolence 
 In Sololá, hundreds of campesinos mobilized to oppose the “Monsanto Law,” which would have opened Guatemala to the privatization of seed. (WNV/Jeff Abbott) 
 Late in the afternoon of September 4, after nearly 10 days of protests by a coalition of labor, indigenous rights groups and farmers, the indigenous peoples and campesinos of Guatemala won are rare victory. Under the pressure of massive mobilizations, the Guatemala legislature repealed Decree 19-2014, commonly referred to as the “Monsanto Law,” which would have given the transnational chemical and seed producer a foot hold into the country’s seed market. 
 “The law would have affected all indigenous people of Guatemala,” said Edgar René Cojtín Acetún of the indigenous municipality of the department of Sololá. “The law would have privatized the seed to benefit only the multinational corporations. If we didn’t do anything now, then our children and grandchildren would suffer the consequences.” 
 Originally passed on June 26, the Monsanto Law was written to protect the intellectual property rights of multinational companies in their investments within Guatemala. The law also allowed Monsanto an entrance into the Guatemalan seed market and set in place stiff penalties for any farmer that was caught selling seed to another farmer without the proper permits. The response was a massive mobilization of a coalition of labor, indigenous groups and campesinos. 
 For 10 days, the streets in front of the legislature of the capital Guatemala City were clogged with thousands of protesters demanding the repeal of the law. Demonstrators also gathered in the rural departments of Guatemala to protest the law and the congressmen who had voted in favor of the law. 
 The changes to the seed market would have heavily hit the campesinos of the department of Sololá, which is a major production area for seed corn for the rest of the country. On September 2, 25,000 to 30,000 people from the around the communities of the department of Sololá shut down the Inter-American Highway in protest of the Monsanto Law. Protesters set up blockades along the highway in three places and shut down all traffic for nearly nine hours. 
 “The communities are organized against any law that privatizes their seed,” said Griselda Pocop of the Association of Women Moving Sololá. “They are also demanding the respect of the traditions and of their livelihoods.” 
 Sacred crops 
 Sololá is one of the agriculture centers of Guatemala, with a majority of the population relying on the growing of maize, beans, coffee and other crops. The department also has one of the highest indigenous populations in the country, with 96 percent of the population identifying as Kaqchikel, T’zutujil, or Kiche Maya. Maize is sacred to the Maya; their cultures and societies revolve around it. According to the Kiche Maya creation story, the Popol Vuh, the gods made humans by grinding the different colors of maize. 
 As is written in the Popol Vuh, “There was a consensus (among the gods), and it was decided what would come of the red, yellow, black, and white maize; it is from these that they made our bones, our blood, and our flesh.” 
 The protection of seed is thus of the utmost importance for the indigenous peoples of Guatemala and across Mesoamerica. “We cannot live without our corn,” said Acetún of the indigenous municipality. “It makes up all of our lives. We consume it for our food, we sell it, it is us.” 
 Rafael, a campesino from the Kaqchikel Maya community of Pixabaj, Sololá, explained, “The people here are Maize … We are not French. We are not anything else. We are Maize; we are Maya.” 
 As the protests mounted, women took the lead in organizing for the defense of maize. In Sololá, women created a seed bank to archive and protect the various varieties of heirloom corn for future generations. “The women of Sololá have taken the lead in organizing to save and protect our heirloom seeds,” said Pocop. “It is our responsibility to preserve our traditional seed, and to pass along the traditional ways of doing things.” 
 Transnational interests 
 Decree 19-2014 was written to comply with the requirements of the Central American Free Trade Agreement. Like the North American Fair Trade Agreement, known as NAFTA, the agreement opens up the economies of Central American countries and the Dominican Republic to cheap imports from the United States. 
 From the moment the trade agreement was proposed, the indigenous and farmer communities protested the law. They argued that since NAFTA had ravaged rural Mexico, CAFTA would have the same affect in the Central American countries. Despite the protests, CAFTA was ratified by Guatemala in 2006. 
 These trade agreements have opened up the Guatemala corn market to the importation of corn from the United States and tied the internal market to the global pricing. The results have been devastating. In the years since the agreement was signed, the price of corn has steadily increased. For years, one quetzal (roughly 12 cents) could purchase eight large tortillas. But today, for the same price, one can only purchase four smaller tortillas. 
 Many farmers have not been able to benefit from the increased prices of corn, because they have had to compete with cheaper imports from El Salvador, Mexico and the United States. “The trade agreement opened up Guatemala to the importation of corn and the prices went up,” said Pocop. “But the imported corn is still cheaper than that produced here.” 
 On the heels of this trade agreement, Decree 19-2014 would have opened up the Guatemala seed market to allow Monsanto’s modified and proprietary seeds into the country. Guatemala is not alone in the region in having to combat the privatization of seed by multinationals; campesinos in El Salvador too have had to defend their livelihoods from the privatizing effects of the trade agreement. 
 A rare victory 
 A week prior to the protest against the Monsanto law the Guatemalan Constitutional Court declared that articles 46 and 50 of the legislation, the two that most violated the rights of farmers, were unconstitutional. 
 Then, in a landslide vote of 117 in favor, 3 against, and 38 abstaining, the Guatemala legislature repealed Decree 19-2014. Soon after learning about the repeal, communities rejoiced. In Sololá alone, more than 5,000 people celebrated the elimination of the law. 
 Yet, just because the law has been repealed does not mean that the indigenous communities and campesinos of Guatemala are in the clear. According to Congressman Amlicar Pop, one of the few indigenous members of the legislature, legal loopholes exist in the bill that allow similar legislation to resurface under a different name. 
 “For the moment, there are legal loopholes that need to be resolved,” Pop told to the Guatemalan newspaper La Hora. 
 Meanwhile, the U.S. State Department declined to comment on any steps that might be taken to bring Guatemala in line with requirements of the Central American Free Trade Agreement. 
 Jeff Abbott is an independent journalist currently based out of Guatemala. His work has appeared NACLA Report on the Americas, Al Jazeera English, and The Progressive. Follow him on Twitter @palabrasdeabajo 
 Welcome home. When you get settled in, share this with Gaelle and Annick. 
 Besos, 
 Dani 
 I am so happy for the “campesinos” of Guatemala! My daughter has moved from Canada to San Lucas of Toliman to be with her partner, founder of IMAP permaculture center, where they are helping farmers to resist agricultural takeover from GM seeds. This victory is certainly a very important one for all indigenous people of Guatemala! 
 If you have an interest in promoting stories of nonviolence, building this community and correcting the mainstream media’s misrepresentation of nonviolent action, please consider donating to Waging Nonviolence. 
 If you’d like to develop a more ongoing supporting relationship with WNV, consider joining our membership program instead of making a one-time donation. 
 In-depth storytelling that captures the universal human drama of people building power from the ground up. 
 A podcast about people working for change and how that work, in turn, changes them. Subscribe on iTunes, Stitcher, Tune In and PRX or by RSS. 
 The Peace Science Digest provides organized, accessible and relevant analysis of the top academic research in the field of peace and conflict studies. 
 Through provocative and courageous action, immigrants are challenging the very existence of the border. 
 The goal of the campaign was to pressure the Guatemalan government to repeal Decree 10-2014, the Monsanto Law. 
 Edgar René Cojtín Acetún, who was a member of the indigenous municipality of Sololá. 
 Joining/exiting order of social groups 
 Groups in 1st Segment: 
 Rural Studies Collective (Cer-lxim) 
 The Indigenous Observatory 
 the Maya Ukux Be Association 
 the Social Collective for the Right to Food 
 the Latin American Agroecological Movement 
 the National Network in Defense of Food Sovereignty 
 Groups in 2nd Segment: 
 Groups in 3rd Segment: 
 Groups in 4th Segment: 
 Groups in 5th Segment: 
 Groups in 6th Segment: 
 Additional notes on joining/exiting order: 
 The National Alliance for Biodiversity Protection and the Union of Indigenous and Peasant Movement were also a part of the Groups in the 1st Segment 
 Segment Length: 
 8 days 
 Opponent, Opponent Responses, and Violence 
 Opponents: 
 The main opponent was the Guatamalan government because they were in control of repealing the "Monsanto Law." However, the United States were indirect opponents because they were responsible for creating the law and the trade agreement (CAFTA). The seed industries (Monsanto, Dupont, Sygenta, others) were indirect opponents as their interests in the seed market opposed those of the indigenous and farmer communities of Guatemala. 
 Campaigner violence: 
 not known 
 Repressive Violence: 
 not known 
 Success Outcome 
 Success in achieving specific demands/goals: 
 6 points out of 6 points 
 Survival: 
 1 point out of 1 points 
 Growth: 
 2 points out of 3 points 
 Total points: 
 9 out of 10 points 
 On 10 June 2014, the Guatemalan Congress approved Decree 19-2014, more commonly known as Plant Varieties Protection Bill or the Monsanto Law (because of Monsanto’s, a multinational company, promotion of the law) and it was planned to take effect on 26 September 2014. The Monsanto Law outlawed the replanting, transportation, or selling of privatized seeds without permission, and made these actions punishable by one to four years in jail and a fine of 1,000 to 10,000 quetzals (130 to 1,300 US dollars). Privatised seeds were seeds that had been specially bred or genetically modified by an individual, group, or corporation and were protected under a patent or copyright. The ownership of patented or copyrighted seed varieties belonged to whomever created the new seed variety. The ownership of the new seed variety included the offspring of seeds bred with the privatized seed and a non-privatized seed. Patents for seeds lasted around 20 to 25 years. 
 The United States introduced the Monsanto Law through the Dominican Republic-Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) as a mandatory statute to being a member of DR-CAFTA . DR-CAFTA was established in 2004 and required signatories to adhere to the International Convention for the Protection of New Plant Varieties, which strived to protect new varieties of seeds through intellectual property rights. DR-CAFTA included the Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and the United States. 
 Many indigenous communities, farmers, and environmentalist groups argued that the law was unconstitutional, because it violated the human right to food and the indigenous right to cultivate their land. Farmers who possessed privatized seeds or crops of the privatized plant variety, intentionally or unintentionally, could lose ownership of their crop and their seeds. This meant that if privatized seeds migrated via natural processes (the wind, animals, water, etc.) to the field of a farmer without rights to these seeds, the privatized seeds could mix with the farmer’s crop, and the farmer would lose ownership of their crop. Privatized seeds were not allowed to be saved, and once a crop mixed with the privatized plant variety the next generation of plants would have the privatized seed’s genetic material and would belong to the corporation or individual that created the seed variety. 
 In Guatemala over 70 percent of the population was involved in small scale agriculture, and many people lived under the poverty line. The Monsanto Law threatened the health and safety of farmers and citizens, their food sovereignty, and Guatemala’s seed biodiversity, according to Antonio Gonzales of the National Network in Defense of Food Sovereignty. Many indigenous groups, environmental groups, scientists, and farmers publicly declared their opposition to the Monsanto Law via press conferences, newspapers, and online sources in late July through early August. The Indigenous Observatory, the Maya Ukux Be Association, the Social Collective for the Right to Food, the Latin American Agroecological Movement, the National Network in Defense of Food Sovereignty, Rural Studies Collective (Cer-lxim), and the National Alliance for Biodiversity Protection all issued public statements against the Monsanto Law and warned against its detrimental effects on farmers, the agricultural economy, indigenous communities, and national food security. The Rural Studies Collective (Cer-lxim) published a report warning the Guatemalan people about the effects of the Monsanto Law. 
 The Union of Indigenous and Peasant Movement filed a writ of amparo, a legal action used to protect constitutional rights not explicitly in the constitution, to the Guatemalan Constitutional Court, stating that the Monsanto Law was unconstitutional because it violated several articles of the Constitution that related to the Protection of Individuals, Cultural Identity, and Natural Heritage, Right to Health, and the obligation of the state to protect consumers. Environmentalist and indigenous groups began an online petition on 16 August 2014 that demanded for President of Guatemala, Otto Perez Molina to reject the Monsanto Law, Decree 19-2014. The petition stated that the Monsanto law was unconstitutional. It gained 26,955 signatures. 
 On 26 August 2014 thousands of Guatemalan farmers, indigenous people, and citizens gathered in protest in Guatemala City outside the Congress building and at the Rural Department of Guatemala. Guatemalan Constitutional Court were discussing their response to the writ of amparo and the unconstitutional violations of the law. The Guatemalan Constitutional Court decided to suspend the law on 26 August, while they further discussed the law’s constitutional violations. 
 Sololá was a major agricultural center of Guatemala with one of the largest indigenous people populations in Guatemala (96 percent of the population identified as Kaqchikel, T’zutujil, or Kiche Maya). The Mayan community regards maize (corn) as sacred, and they had depended on it for centuries. Therefore it was very important to preserve their seeds that had been passed down for thousands of years. Edgar René Cojtín Acetún from the municipality of Solola stated, “We cannot live without our corn. It makes up all of our lives. We consume it for our food, we sell it, it is us.” In response to the Monsanto Law, women created seed banks to store, archive, and protect heirloom varieties of corn. Community leaders of Sololá and the local municipality also organized an education campaign throughout Sololá on 31 August 2014. Community leaders presented material in the native language, Kaqchikel, and discussed the benefits and consequences of the Decree 19-2014 or the Monsanto Law .They also discussed the company Monsanto and their history in other countries. 
 On 2 September 2014, two days after the educational event, 25,000 to 30,000 indigenous community members from Sololá gathered to shut down the Inter-American highway going towards Guatemala City, Guatemala’s capital. They formed three blockades along the highway which stopped traffic for nine hours. Community members carried signs expressing their opposition of the Monsanto law such as, “Monsanto Kills” and “No to Genetically Modified Seeds.” 
 On 2 September 2014, Congress announced their plans to repeal the law over the next three days. After 10 days of protest, on 4 September 2014, the Guatemalan Congress members voted 117 in favor, 3 against, and 38 abstaining in favor of repealing the “Monsanto Law.” This was a victory for the farmer, indigenous, and environmental organizations of Guatemala. 
 Research Notes 
 Sources: 
 Abbott, Jeff. 2014. “In Guatemala, Indigenous Communities Prevail against Monsanto - Waging Nonviolence.” Waging Nonviolence . Retrieved 2015 
 Anon. 2015. “CAFTA-DR (Dominican Republic-Central America FTA).” Office of the United States Trade Representatives. https://web.archive.org/web/20151226232815/https://ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements/cafta-dr-dominican-republic-central-america-ft 
 Anon. 2014. “Guatemala Organizing Against ‘Monsanto Law.’” PMS Media Solutions: US Official News . 
 Anon. 2014. “Guatemala Rejects U.S. Trade Law Protecting Monsanto And GMOs.” Legal Monitor Worldwide. 
 Anon. 2014. “United, We Will Never Be Defeated: Guatemala’s Victory Over Monsanto.” PMS Media Solutions: US Official News . 
 Anon. 2015. “Seed Laws That Criminalize Farmers: Additional Country Experiences .” Grain . https://web.archive.org/web/20151220103048/https://www.grain.org/article/entries/5147-seed-laws-that-criminalise-farmers-additional-country-experiences 
 Modena , Carolina. 2015. “Guatemala Mass Mobilisations Win In Defeating the ‘Monsanto Law’ Pushed by US.”Environmental Justice Atlas. https://web.archive.org/web/20151227164125/https://ejatlas.org/conflict/guatemala-mass-mobilisations-win-in-defeating-the-monsanto-law-pushed-by-us 
 A project of Swarthmore College, including Peace and Conflict Studies, the Peace Collection, and the Lang Center for Civic and Social Responsibility. Copyright Swarthmore College. 
 Home » Haitian peasants march against Monsanto Company for food and seed sovereignty 
 Haitian peasants march against Monsanto Company for food and seed sovereignty 
 On June 4th about ten thousand Haitian peasants marched to protest US-based Monsanto Company’s ‘deadly gift’ of seed to the government of Haiti. The march was seven kilometers from Papaye to Hinche, in a rural area on the central plateau, and was organized by several Haitian rural social movements that are proposing a development model based on food and seed sovereignty instead of industrial agriculture. Slogans for the march included “long live native maize seed” and “Monsanto’s GMO & hybrid seed violate peasant agriculture.” 
 The poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, Haiti shares the Caribbean island of Hispaniola with the Dominican Republic. About 65 percent of Haiti’s population lives in rural areas and are subsistence farmers. On January 12 2010, a devastating earthquake leveled Haiti’s capital city Port au Prince, and 800,000 urban refugees migrated to rural areas. According to Chavannes Jean-Baptiste, coordinator of the Papaye Peasant Movement (MPP) and a member of La Via Campesina’s international coordinating committee, “there is presently a shortage of seed in Haiti because many rural families used their maizeseed to feed refugees.” 
 With sales of $11.7 billion in 2009, US-based transnational corporation (TNC) Monsanto Company is the world’s largest seed company, controlling one-fifth of the global proprietary seed market and 90 percent of seed patents from agricultural biotechnology. In May Monsanto announced that it had delivered 60 tons of hybrid seed maizeand vegetables to Haiti, and over 400 tons of its seed (worth $4 million) will be delivered during 2010 to 10,000 farmers. The TNC United Parcel Service is providing transport logistics, While Winner, a $127 million project funded by the US Agency for International Development (USAID) and focused on “agricultural intensification”, is distributing the seed.1 According to Monsanto, the decision to donate seed to Haiti was decided at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland: “CEO Hugh Grant and Executive Vice President Jerry Steiner attended the event and had conversations with attendees about what could be done to help Haiti.”2 It is unclear whether any Haitians were included in the conversations in Davos. 
 Some have charged that the Monsanto representative in Haiti is Jean-Robert Estimé, who served as foreign minister during the brutal 29-year Duvalier family dictatorship.3 While Monsanto vehemently denies this claim4, Estimé is included in an email exchange about the donation between Elizabeth Vancil, Director of Global Development Partnerships at Monsanto and Emmanuel Prophete, a Haitian agronomist working for the Minister of Agriculture.5 The domain for Estimé’s email address is for Winner (www.winner.ht).6 
 Many Haitians consider Monsanto’s seed donation to be part of a broader strategy of US economic and political imperialism. “The Haitian government is using the earthquake to sell the country to the multinationals,” stated Jean-Baptiste. Vancil stated that opening up Haitian markets to Monsanto’s products “would be good.”7 
 Monsanto is emphasizing that the donated seed is hybrid and not genetically-modified (GM)8. However, hybrid seed will not increase Haitian farmers’ food sovereignty or self-reliance; Monsanto acknowledges that they will be unable to save seed to plant in the future9, and that although the seed is being provided free of charge, farmers will pay for it. “Providing an outright donation of seed would undercut one of the basic pieces of Haiti’s agricultural and economic infrastructure,” says Monsanto10, which is donating the seed to the government to sell to farmers. Winner is distributing the seed through farmer association stores, which will use the revenue to reinvest in other inputs, and help “farmers decide whether to use additional inputs (including fertilizer and herbicides) and…how to handle next year’s planting season.” 11 
 Haiti’s agricultural sector has already been decimated by US interference. In 1991, Jean Bertrande Aristide, Haiti’s first democratically-elected president, was removed in a US-supported military coup. As a condition for his return, the US, IMF and World Bank required that Aristide open up Haiti to free trade. Tariffs on rice (Haiti’s staple grain) were reduced from 35% to 3%, government funding was diverted away from agricultural development to the nation’s foreign debt, and subsidized rice from Arkansas (it was the Clinton administration) flooded the Haitian market. Haitian rice farmers were decimated12, and today almost all of the rice consumed in Haiti is imported. Sacks marked ‘US Rice’ are everywhere in the markets and neighborhood stores, on peoples’ heads and the backs of mules. 
 The US is now undermining Haiti’s food system from the ground. A letter from the Haitian Minister of Agriculture to Monsanto implies that GM seed may have been offered in addition to hybrid. “In the absence of a law regulating the use of genetically-modified organisms (GMO) in Haiti, I am not at liberty to authorize the use of Roundup Ready seed or any other GMO material,” stated Juanas Gue, Haitian Minister of Agriculture, in a letter to Monsanto13, which has already proven the length it will go to open new markets in developing countries for its GM seed and toxic chemicals. In 2005, Monsanto was found guilty by the US government of bribing high-level Indonesian officials to legalize GM cotton. Evidence indicates that in Brazil in 2004, Monsanto sold a farm to a senator for one-third of its value in exchange for his work to legalize glyphosate, the world’s most widely used herbicide (sold by the corporation as Roundup).14 
 According to Paulo Almeida, 31, a member of the Brazilian Movement of Landless Rural Workers who has been in Haiti since 2009 on a solidarity brigade organized by Via Campesina-Brasil, Monsanto also encouraged Brazilian farmers to illegally plant Roundup Ready soybeans. “They want to implant the technological package of the Green Revolution, which isn’t possible here in Haiti. There is no way to survive with monoculture here.” 
 The hybrid seed maize donated by Monsanto was treated with the fungicide Maxim XO, and the calypso tomato seed were treated with thiram, a chemical so toxic that the US government requires agricultural workers to wear protective clothing when handling seed treated with the fungicide. Monsanto’s communications to the Ministry of Agriculture contains no explanation of the danger of these chemicals, or any offer of special clothing or training for Haitian farmers.15 
 Development of industrial agriculture in Haiti is related to plans to develop an export-oriented agrofuels industry in the country. In 2007 USAID published a report on the ‘prospects for solid and liquid biofuels in Haiti’16, while the Inter-American Development Bank’s Haiti strategy document for 2007-2011 states that removing “obstacles to export of agricultural products are a top priority,” and that “biofuel promotion is being explored specifically.”17 
 The Obama administration has a hypocritical and inconsistent policy on Monsanto and GM crops. When the Obamas moved into the White House they planted an organic garden, and one can only assume they did not plant GM or hybrid seed. In the US Monsanto monopolizes 60 percent of the entire seed maizemarket and 80 percent of the GM seed maizemarket. In March the administration convened public anti-trust hearings on competitiveness in the US seed market, and has yet to publish its conclusions. Yet the Obama administration is strongly promoting the interests of US agricultural biotechnology TNCs abroad. At the Biotechnology Industry Organization’s annual convention in May, Jose Fernandez, assistant secretary for the Bureau of Economic, Energy and Business Affairs, stated that the US State Department (which controls USAID) will aggressively confront critics of agricultural biotechnology.18 
 Meanwhile, the US Supreme Court is presently deliberating Monsanto Co. vs Geertson Seed Farms, a case about the ecological and economic effects of genetic contamination of organic seed from GM pollen. A favorable decision for Monsanto will lead to the widespread contamination of organic alfalfa, which will destroy the organic milk industry in the US. Though Monsanto’s GM pollen has been contaminating Mexican corn for a decade, the corporation recently received license from the country’s government to conduct open field trials of GM maize in four states. Mexico is the cradle of maize, with thousands of native varieties. Contamination of Haitian maize with pollen from Monsanto’s hybrid corn will also occur, and could render the Haitian varieties unusable for saving and replanting, forcing farmers to become dependent upon the corporation. 
 “The entrance of Monsanto into Haiti will spell the disappearance of the peasants,” said Doudou Pierre Festil, a member of the Peasant Movement of the Congress of Papaye and coordinator for the National Haitian Network for Food Sovereignty and Security. “If Monsanto’s seed come into Haiti, the seed of the peasants will disappear. Monsanto’s seed will create problems of health and for the environment. Thus it is necessary for us to struggle against this project of death to do away with the peasants.” 
 “If the US government truly wants to help Haiti, it would help the Haitians to build food sovereignty and sustainable agriculture, based on their own native seed and access to land and credit. That is the way to help Haiti,” says Dena Hoff, a diversified organic farmer in Montana and member of Via Campesina’s international coordinating committee. 
 The United Nations estimates that 75 percent of the world’s plant genetic diversity has been lost as farmers have abandoned their local seed for genetically-uniform varieties offered by TNCs, and as GM and hybrid seed have contaminated native varieties. Genetic homogeneity increases farmers’ vulnerability to sudden changes in climate and the appearance of new pests and diseases, while seed agrobiodiversity, adapted to different microclimates, altitudes and soils, is fundamental for adapting to climate change. 
 Critics of Monsanto’s donation argue that the best way to ensure enough seed for Haiti is through the collection, conservation and propagation of local, native varieties in community seed banks.  Haiti’s native seed varieties have developed and adapted to the different regions of Haiti over generations, in tandem with its people. Saving and replanting seed strengthens crops’ genetic plasticity, e.g. their capacity to adapt rapidly over generations to changing growing conditions, and also increases agrobiodiversity. 
 Island nations are particulalry vulnerable to climate change. If the US does not get its’ policy for Haiti right this time, there will not be another chance. Given the extent of food insecurity and environmental degradation in Haiti, the country must adopt a policy for food sovereignty in order for its people and biodiversity to survive. Ninety-eight percent of Haiti’s original tropical forest cover has been lost, there is widespread soil erosion, and desertification is increasing. Haiti cannot sustain further ecological destruction from the imposition of industrial agriculture. Alternatively, if the Obama administration supports a policy of food sovereignty in Haiti, the country could construct a model food system that could feed all Haitians healthy food, increase biodiversity and ecological resilience, and contribute to local, sustainable economic development. Recent research by agroecologists at the University of Michigan shows that sustainable, small-scale farming is more efficient at conserving and increasing biodiversity and forests than industrial agriculture.19 In order to implement a policy for food sovereignty, Haiti must develop without Monsanto’s seed. 
 Fortunately, Haitian peasants have a long history of resistance and struggle. Haiti was the first colony in the Western Hemisphere to have a successful slave revolt that resulted in an independent nation in 1804. Haiti became a global pariah to the emerging global powers, especially the US. “We defend peasant agriculture, we defend food sovereignty, and we defend the environment of Haiti until our last drop of blood,” states the Final Declaration of the march against Monsanto. “We commit to unite our forces to change this anti-peasant, anti-national state. We want to construct another kind of state, a state that defends peasant agriculture, a state that assists the rural men and women in the protection of the environment, and the conservation of soil and forest.” 20 
 Speaking from a stage in Charlemagne Péralte plaza, named for the Hinche-born leader of an armed movement against the 1915-1934 US occupation of Haiti, Jean-Baptise symbolically set Monsanto seed on fire, while others began to distribute packets of native seed maize to the cheering crowd. “We have to fight for our local seed,” Jean-Baptiste told them. “We have to defend our food sovereignty.” 21 
 Via News – June 15 2010 
 1 PR Newswire. “Monsanto Company Donates Conventional Maizeand Vegetable Seed to Haitian Farmers to Help Address Food Security Needs.” May 13 2010. http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/monsanto-company-donates-conventional-corn-and-vegetable-seed-to-haitian-farmers-to-help-address-food-security-needs-93713444.html. 
 2 Monsanto Company. “Monsanto donates maizeand vegetable seed to Haiti.” Monsanto Blog May 13 2010. http://www.monsantoblog.com/2010/05/13/monsanto-donates-seed-to-haiti/. Accessed June 7 2010. 
 3 Urfie, Fr. Jean-Yves. “A new earthquake hits Haiti: Monsanto’s deadly gift of 475 tons of genetically-modified seed to Haitian farmers.” Global Research. Canada. May 11, 2010. 
 4 Monsanto Company. “Haiti seed donation timeline.” http://www.monsanto.com/features/helping_haitian_farmers_timeline.asp.  Accessed June 15 2010 @ 10:46 EST. 
 5 Email exchange dated April 1st between Elizabeth Vancil and Emmanuel Prophete, in which Jean Robert Estimé is included at a Project Winner email domain. 
 6 project winner. 
 7 Katz, Jonathan M. “Monsanto gives Haiti $4 million in hybrid seed.” Associated Press. May 14, 2010. http://www.politicalfriendster.com/showConnection.php?id1=6093&id2=238. 
 8 Monsanto Company. “Five answers on Monsanto’s Haiti seed donation. Monsanto blog May 20 2010. http://www.monsantoblog.com/2010/05/20/five-answers-monsanto-haiti/. 
 9 Katz, Jonathan M. “Monsanto gives Haiti $4 million in hybrid seed.” Associated Press. May 14, 2010. http://www.politicalfriendster.com/showConnection.php?id1=6093&id2=238. 
 10 Monsanto Company. “Monsanto donates maizeand vegetable seed to Haiti.” Monsanto Blog May 13 2010. http://www.monsantoblog.com/2010/05/13/monsanto-donates-seed-to-haiti/. 
 11 Monsanto Company. “Five answers on Monsanto’s Haiti seed donation. Monsanto blog May 20 2010. http://www.monsantoblog.com/2010/05/20/five-answers-monsanto-haiti/. 
 12 Holt-Gimenez, Eric. “Haiti: roots of liberty, roots of disaster.” Huffington Post, January 21 2010. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/eric-holt-gimenez/haiti-roots-of-liberty–r_b_431724.html. 
 13 Haitian Minister of Agriculture. Letter to Mr. Jerry Steiner, Executive Vice President for Sustainability and Corporate Affairs, Monsanto Company. March 26 2010. 
 14 Kenfield, Isabella. “Monsanto’s seed of corruption in Brazil.” North American Congress on Latin America. October 16 2010. https://nacla.org/node/1417 . 
 15 Bell, Beverly. “Haitian farmers commit to burning Monsanto hybrid seed.” Huffington Post. May 17 2010. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/beverly-bell/haitian-farmers-commit-to_b_578807.html. 
 16 Portnoff, Marc. “Prospects for solid and liquid biofuels in Haiti.” United States Agency for International Development. April 2007. 
 17 Inter-American Development Bank. “Country strategy with Haiti: 2007-2011.” November 2007. http://enet.iadb.org/idbdocswebservices/idbdocsInternet/IADBPublicDoc.aspx?docnum=1309702 . 
 18 Clapp, Stephen. “State Department official pledges to confront global biotech critics naysayers.” Informa.com.  May 10 2010; Volume: 52, Issue: 09. Received via email on May 7 2010. 
 19 University of Michigan. “SNRE Professor Perfecto co-authors PNAS paper on family farms, biodiversity and food production.” ANN ARBOR, MI, February 22, 2010. http://www.snre.umich.edu/newsroom/2010-02-22/snre_professor_perfecto_co_authors_pnas_paper_on_family_farms_biodiversity_and_f 
 20 Final declaration of Haitian movements against Monsanto, June 4 2010. 
 21 Weekly News Update. “Haiti: Thousands of farmers reject Monsanto’s seeds.” http://weeklynewsupdate.blogspot.com/2010/06/wnu-1036-haitian-farmers-reject.html . June 7 2010. 
 Interview with Jean-Baptise Chavannes, spokesperson of Mouvement Paysan de Papaye, Haïti (Farmer Papaya Movement), by Frédéric Guérin and Claire Chauvet, Inf’OGM administrators, about Haiti’s situation in general after the devastating hurricane Matthew, and about agriculture, farmers and international aid. 
 Inf’OGM – What is the farmers’ situation after cyclone Matthew ripped through Haiti ? The western media mention the risk of famine. 
 JBC – Before cyclone Matthew, the situation of peasants families was difficult because last years’ draught destroyed 80 % of the crops. The farmers were thus in a severe food insecurity even before cyclone Matthew. The NFSC (National Food Security Council), a state institution which usually underestimates the reality, said four million people were in a state of heavy food insecurity in July 2015. We do estimate that eight million people – the majority of which paradoxically lives in a rural area – suffered from hunger last year. The cyclone has thus worsened an already critical situation. 
 As it is, we now have to speak of a food catastrophe. And famine has settled in the areas most affected by the cyclone. Matthew has destroyed the entire agricultural production of six out of ten departments of the country. Three other departments are partially affected. The next months, hunger will be very harsh. 
 Inf’OGM – On the farmers’ behalf, are there any needs (urgent or not) and what are they ? Is there a need for seeds or not ? Media mention the seed distribution. 
 JCB – At this moment, it is the very survival of the majority of the peasants families which is at risk, not only because of hunger, but also because of the diseases. Cholera is wrecking all the departments devastated by the cyclone, and more specifically four of them. As this is a very contagious disease, it might spread rapidly if nothing is done. After the phase of extreme emergency with its need for food, drinking water, clothes, drugs, provisory accommodation, farming families will have to start agricultural production again, though the soils are totally eroded. Families will need agricultural tools, beans, maize, finger millet and vegetable seed, but also manioc, potato, sugarcane, yam, banana cuttings etc.  The most urgent seeds are the beans, maize and vegetable seeds, because we rapidly have to produce food. As everything was carried away by the water in the areas touched by cyclone Matthew, we absolutely need to distribute seeds.  We can buy farm saved seeds in the least affected departments of the country, but we can already tell this will not be enough to supply the entire country. 
 Inf’OGM – Concerning external help, do you fear the post-earthquake scenario will happen again – when Monsanto tried to get its commercial seeds in Haiti ? 
 JCB – We do indeed fear the 2010 scenario to happen again, when after the earthquake Monsanto gave the country a poisoned gift of 400 tons of hybrid maize seeds… But Monsanto being the King of transgenic maize seeds, it is hard to find non-GMO Monsanto seeds. The Farmer Papaya Movement launched a campaign against this project both on the national and international levels. But we are not fools. The danger is ever-present with american NGO’s working in the field. It is not unlikely that some organisations or companies take advantage of this crisis situation by distributing commercial seeds, which have a negative impact on farm saved seeds, because they are either hybrid or GMO’s. That is why we consider the possibility to import seeds from Cuba or Brazil or other latin-american countries where farmers’ organisations defend local seed that can be reproduced. Unfortunately, Haitian farmers’ organisations do not have the financial means to import these seeds. 
 Inf’OGM – What do you specifically expect the international community to do to help Haitian farmers ? 
 JCB – The agricultural sector’s needs are huge after this disaster. Small scale agriculture must be relaunched, fruit trees and forests must be planted again. Even before the cyclone, forests were already quite inexistent in Haiti ; today work needs to be done to repair the soil and to protect it.  We do not expect the international community to do this, because developed countries’ aid is not neutral. It often aims at eliminating a small-scale agriculture and small farmers. But we do hope for the solidarity of farmers’ organisations on the international level. They can help us to get farm saved seeds, agricultural tools, to create fruit and forest trees nurseries etc.  Some solidarity NGO’s can also contribute to these programs. Every kind of help to face the emergency situation is also welcome : for instance drugs against cholera, products for water treatment etc. 
 Inf’OGM – Is there a national legislation concerning GMO’s ? 
 JCB -No, there is no legislation on GMO’s in Haiti. 
 GMO Opposition Is About Culture and Economics, Not Morals 
 Monsanto's Roundup brand herbicide products are arranged for a photograph in Shelbyville, Kentucky, on April 4. (MUST CREDIT: Bloomberg photo by Luke Sharrett) 
 Henry HomeyerFor the Valley News 
 Friday, January 12, 2018 
 Print 
 Mitch Daniels, president of Purdue University in Indiana and former governor of that state, recently wrote an op-ed piece for The Washington Post that also appeared in the Valley News titled “GMO Opposition Is Fundamentally Immoral.” I disagree. 
 GMO stands for “genetically modified organism,” and indicates that the genome of a living organism has been modified by introducing one or more genes through the process of genetic engineering. Commonly, genes from bacteria are introduced to plants such as corn or soy to give them new traits. 
 According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, currently over 90 percent of corn and soy grown in America is produced using GMO technology. 
 Why? Simply, GMOs make big agriculture more profitable. Genetically modified organisms can largely eliminate mechanical weeding and reduce insect populations. 
 Monsanto developed “Roundup Ready” soy and corn in the late 1990s using a patented technology that produces plants able to survive despite being sprayed with the herbicide glyphosate, which is sold as Roundup by Monsanto. That allows farmers to plant, spray Roundup as needed, and harvest. No weeding. 
 In 2002 I interviewed a farmer in Illinois who told me he could plant a thousand acres of GMO corn, hire someone to spray Roundup as needed, and then harvest the corn. He did this using only three weeks of his annual vacation from his job at a factory. From that, he said, he made a very significant income. But this would not be possible without GMO technology. 
 The other breakthrough in GMO technology came when a gene from a soil bacterium known as Bt was introduced to seeds through bio-engineering. Bt produces a protein that is lethal to larvae of certain insects including corn rootworm and cotton bollworm. The protein that kills insect larvae, however, is digested in our gut, and thus we are able to eat Bt corn and other Bt foods without getting sick. 
 So why the fuss about GMOs? 
 Monsanto has done a good job of promoting GMO crops as safe and modern. Tests have been done using rats as subjects to test the safety of consuming GMOs, but not on humans. Although the U.S. government accepted that those tests show GMOs to be safe, other tests had different results and most European governments have not approved GMOs as safe for human consumption. 
 Most processed foods — your breakfast cereal or a frozen pizza — now contain either GMO corn (often as high-fructose corn syrup) or soy (which is used to make more than 60 percent of vegetable oil used in America). No one can prove if consuming large quantities of GMO food over the course of a lifetime is detrimental or not. 
 But there are other issues. A tiny percentage of weeds will mutate, and survive a spraying of Roundup. They become “super weeds” that require higher doses of Roundup or a chemical cocktail of herbicides, negating the benefit of the Roundup Ready technology. As pesticide applications increase, residues of the herbicides show up at higher levels in food. Roundup is deemed safe by the EPA, but not all scientists agree. 
 Organic farmers fear using Bt widely in GMOs will render it ineffective for their own use. 
 Bt has been approved for use by organic farmers for decades, long before Monsanto put it inside cells. Organic farmers use it primarily as a spray on potato leaves (and some other plants) to control beetles. When larvae eat the leaves with Bt on them, they sicken and stop feeding. Bt was never in the potatoes themselves. 
 In rural Africa, where I lived for nearly 10 years as a young man, farmers plant, weed and harvest by hand. When I lived in Mali, a semi-desert country, farmers sometimes had to plant two or three times if rain did not continue soon enough after seeds germinated. 
 They re-planted each year with seeds they had saved. But Monsanto (and other companies) own the rights to the modified DNA in their seeds. This means farmers would have to buy seeds from them each year, and maybe more than once. GMO seeds are much more expensive than regular seeds, too. 
 GMO technology is all based on tractors tilling thousands of acres at a time, not small plots that feed a family. Tractors are not affordable in most of the developing world. 
 And even if tractors were donated, they would be impossible to maintain in the long run. 
 GMO technology could be used to provide health benefits, and has on occasion. “Golden rice” used GMO technology to increase beta carotene content in an effort to reduce blindness and death in children suffering from vitamin A deficiency. Although it was developed more than 10 years ago, it has not been widely used. There is a new papaya that is resistant to a virus that was destroying the crop. 
 Some university scientists are looking at new GMO technologies that will benefit people in the developing world. But the vast majority of GMOs have been developed and produced to make money for seed and chemical producers, and of course, for big farmers. 
 Most seed producers for home gardeners have signed a pledge not to sell GMO seeds. Because of the cost of developing and testing a GMO strain, it is unlikely that you will ever be able to buy seeds for a GMO tomato or pole bean. 
 There will be controversy over the health effects of GMO foods for years to come as there are so many variables. If you choose to minimize your exposure to them, eat organic food only. Organic food cannot, by law, include GMO components. And thanks to the Vermont Legislature, soon all processed foods will be labeled for GMO content. 
 I’m not sure why Mitch Daniels thinks someone is keeping African, Asian and South American farmers from buying GMO seeds. Monsanto would be glad to sell them GMO seeds. 
 This is not a moral issue, but one of culture and economics. It appears to me that Daniels has no idea how subsistence farmers survive. 
 Henry Homeyer is an organic gardener and the author of four gardening books. He may be reached at henry.homeyer@comcast.net. 
 Opening the lines of communication between research scientists and the wider community 
 Challenging Evolution: How GMOs Can Influence Genetic Diversity 
 by Heather Landry 
 Summary: The vast diversity in gene sequences are what create the large variety of plants and animals we see today. Genetic diversity is crucial for adapting to new environments, as more variation in genes leads to more individuals of a population having favorable traits to withstand harsh conditions. Low genetic diversity, on the other hand, can be very problematic during changing environments, as all individuals will react similarly. It is assumed that genetically engineered modifications may affect the genetic diversity of a population through crossbreeding or uncontrolled growth; therefore, many researchers are investigating whether this is true and how it might be prevented. 
 — 
 For billions of years, evolution has given rise to the diverse life forms on Earth today. This process has created species with wide-ranging traits and characteristics; however, producing desired agricultural products by natural evolution or selective breeding can be very slow. Now that researchers have a better understanding of genetic engineering, it has become possible to bypass evolution by introducing genetic modifications into plants and animals in the lab. These genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are advantageous for the food supply because they contribute to faster crop production (see this article and this article), pest resistance (see this article and this article), and more nutritious food sources (see this article). Despite these benefits of GMOs, it is imperative to first understand the risks of producing GMOs before introducing them into the wild. 
 A major concern of genetically modified organisms is that they will cause reduced genetic diversity of plants and animals in the environment. What this means is that the DNA, which codes for proteins in an organism, will become more similar between individuals of a species. Genetic diversity is directly related to biodiversity, the variability in the traits of organisms that make up an ecosystem, because diversity in DNA will inform the characteristics of the organisms that make up a population. Maintaining genetic diversity is important for the environment and agriculture because increased variability in DNA will provide a better opportunity for organisms to adapt to a changing environment. 
 One example of when a lack of genetic diversity contributed to a major agricultural problem is the potato famine that afflicted Ireland in the mid 1800s. At this time, Ireland was heavily dependent on potatoes for nutrition, and the type of potatoes they cultivated were not grown from seeds. Instead, they planted sections from a parent potato. In this way, all potatoes were clones of their parents and contained identical genetic information. The lack of genetic variability in these potato crops proved detrimental when an invasive pathogen, P. infestans, wiped out the entire population [1]. Because all potatoes had nearly identical genes, there were no populations of potatoes with favorable traits that allowed them to evade P. infestans. Had Ireland grown different varieties of potato crops with more genetic diversity, it would have been more likely for a population of potatoes to contain genes that provide resistance to the pathogen. If a large enough percentage of potato crops in Ireland were resistant to P. infestans, perhaps this famine would not have been so catastrophic. 
 Figure 1. Reduced genetic diversity contributes to weak adaptation to changing environments. During the Irish potato famine, most potatoes were clones of their parents with nearly identical gene sequences. Had the population of cultivated potatoes been more genetically diverse (top panel), many potatoes would have had a greater opportunity to survive the deadly pathogen, P. infestans. However, because there was low genetic diversity in Irish potatoes at the time, a vast majority of potato crops were wiped out by the pathogen (bottom panel). 
 So how might GMOs affect genetic diversity? One possibility is that GMOs may crossbreed with wild plants or animals. A second is that favorable traits could allow GMOs to take over a population. It is easy to speculate how these situations would lead to changes in genetic diversity, but have they ever been observed with GMOs growing today? 
 When GMOs and non-GMOs mate 
 The ability for different species to mate, also known as hybridization, has allowed for the vast diversity of wild plant types we see in the environment today. However, this process is not restricted to wild plants and can occur between any type of plant, including wild crops and GMOs, if they are reproductively compatible. When GM plants are in close proximity with wild plants, they can cross-pollinate, producing a hybrid version of the two. Typically, natural hybridization has a positive impact on genetic diversity because it introduces new gene combinations into a population. However, opponents to GMOs are concerned that if modified genes are introduced into wild plant populations by hybridization, they could impart a fitness advantage in the hybrid species, meaning that the hybrid species would be better able to reproduce. This fitness advantage would lead to the engineered gene being maintained in the population and thus reduce the genetic diversity of the wild species. 
 One example of hybridization between GM crops and wild species has been documented in creeping bentgrass commonly used on golf courses. Scotts Miracle-Gro genetically engineered this grass to contain a gene that confers resistance to a common herbicide so that the golf course can be sprayed to kill weeds without harm to the grass. Because this grass is wind-pollinated, a perennial, and highly capable of outcrossing with related wild species, researchers decided to investigate wild grass in close proximity for the presence of the herbicide resistance gene. The researchers collected seeds from wild plants at varied distances from the origin of the grass farm and used herbicides to detect tolerant plants. They confirmed the presence of the herbicide resistant gene in wild grass up to 9 miles from its origin only one year after the grass was planted [2,3,4]. This distance is very surprising because most hybridization events have been reported between plants that are less than a mile apart. It is clear from this study that genetic modifications can be transferred to wild species through hybridization; however, future investigations will need to be performed in order to differentiate whether the genetic modification increases the fitness of wild species or if these hybridizations are a natural result of planting a large grass farm in close proximity to wild species. 
 Studies of creeping bentgrass uncovered clear hybridization events between GM crops and wild grass; however, it is important to recognize that cross-pollination is not equally likely for all crops. Many crops commonly cultivated in the US, such as corn, soybeans, and cotton, are not perennials and do not have wild relatives growing in close proximity. It is clear from this study that understanding the reproductive behavior of a GM crop and the function of its genetic modification is very important before introducing it into the wild. 
 Figure 2. Spreading of GM creeping bentgrass into wild populations. To investigate potential hybridization events between GM creeping bentgrass (A. stolonifera) and the closely related species, A. gigantea, researchers tested wild A. gigantea plants at 39 locations surrounding the GM bentgrass farm. Hybridization was tested by growing seeds from wild A. gigantea plants and testing the resulting grass for 1) resistance to herbicide and 2) presence of the herbicide resistance gene. The researchers found seeds with the genetic modifications at 13 of the 39 locations (red dots), including one location 9 miles from the GM bentgrass farm. The GM positive seeds at all locations were less than 0.5% of the entire population. Adapted from Watrud et al., 2004 [2]. 
 Genetically engineered traits may be too advantageous 
 In addition to crossbreeding, GMOs can also affect genetic diversity through uncontrolled growth of a genetically engineered population. If advantageous genes are introduced into GMOs, it may allow them to become more fit than their wild relatives. This situation would be detrimental because the GMOs would grow faster and reproduce more often, allowing them to take resources away from non-GMO relatives if they inhabit the same environment. 
 One GM animal where uncontrolled growth is a concern is a fast-growing Atlantic salmon engineered by AquaBounty technologies to reach market weight in half the time as their standard relatives. AquaBounty introduced two sequences of DNA into these salmon. The first codes a growth hormone from the related Chinook salmon that stimulates growth, and the second is a sequence that activates the growth hormone year-round and not just in warm weather [4,6]. The combination of these two DNA sequences allows these fish to develop at a dramatically increased rate, and many are concerned about what would happen if they escaped into the wild. Some believe that engineered salmon will continue to grow at a faster rate in the wild. However, others suspect that because the engineered salmon have traits that were not developed by natural selection, they will not be perfectly adapted to the wild environment, resulting in similar or even reduced fitness compared to wild relatives in their natural habitat. In one study performed in a similar transgenic salmon, it was shown that fish with a genetically modified growth hormone actually grow at a much closer rate to wild fish in a tank that simulates a natural stream-like habitat compared to a conventional hatchery tank [7]. Despite studies like this, it is not possible to conclude whether this is the case for all types of genetically engineered salmon or whether it will hold true in the wild [8]. Therefore, to prevent GM salmon from propagating in the wild, AquaBounty uses both physical and biological methods of containment. AquaBounty’s salmon are all female, grown in land-based tanks, and are sterile due to increased chromosome number. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has an ongoing review of AquaBounty’s genetically engineered salmon and no decision has yet been made about whether this salmon will be the first genetically modified animal to enter the US food supply. 
 Figure 3. Growth of genetically engineered salmon depends on the environment. One study with genetically engineered coho salmon investigated the growth of GM and non-GM salmon in hatcheries verses a simulated natural environment. They found that the GM salmon are almost three times the length of non-GM salmon reared for one year in a hatchery environment. However, after one year of growth in a simulated natural environment, GM salmon are only about 1.25 times the length of non-GM salmon. Adapted from Sundström et al., 2007 [7]. 
 What can be done to protect genetic diversity? 
 Although there is little evidence that GMOs have impacted genetic diversity in today’s environment, scientists and ecologists are very aware of the potential influence that GMOs have on biodiversity. Therefore, researchers are investigating how to better prevent crossbreeding and spreading of GMOs, similar to the physical and biological containment strategies used for AquaBounty’s salmon. Some approaches for preventing hybridization of plants involve methods that make the second generation of seeds sterile or dependent on a chemical for fertility. Other approaches prevent the spread of genetically modified material by requiring that two GMO plants must be crossed in order for the offspring to contain the advantageous trait. Some researchers have even completely recoded the genome of bacteria to include synthetic amino acids that are not present in the wild [9,10]. This approach, if adapted to crops treated with synthetic amino acids in an enclosed area, is a powerful tool because it significantly limits the chance that GM plants will escape dependence on the synthetic amino acids or be able to share its DNA with non-GM species. 
 We have learned from evolution that organisms are capable of developing a large variety of advantageous traits through natural genetic mutations and hybridizations. By manipulating this system, scientists are still uncovering how genetically engineered modifications affect the natural environment. Many of the concerns with genetic diversity in agriculture are not restricted to GMOs, as standard crop cultivation faces very similar issues. Therefore, it is imperative that researchers continue to study the impact of GMOs and agricultural practices on genetic diversity and discover new ways to minimize their influence on biodiversity. 
 Heather Landry is a Ph.D. candidate in the Biological and Biomedical Sciences Program at Harvard University. 
 2. Watrud, S. Evidence for landscape-level, pollen-mediated gene flow from genetically modified creeping bentgrass with CP4 EPSPS as a marker. (September, 2004) PNAS. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC521937/ 
 25 thoughts on “Challenging Evolution: How GMOs Can Influence Genetic Diversity” 
 Hi- I’m writing a piece about gmos for my school magazine at Ithaca College, and I was wondering if I could possibly get a quote about the detriments of a lack of biodiversity to GMO crops. Thanks so much, Anna 
 Hi Anna – I’m excited you are spreading information about genetic diversity of GMOs to your college! I just sent you an email if you have more specific questions for your article. Best, Heather 
 A well-written article. Thank you for sharing your opinion. Would you mind I introducing your website and cite your opinion in Chinese. I hope your article will help to arouse more concerns and awareness before large-scale GMO agriculture is developing and spreading in China. 
 Heather, Clearly written article, and showing the restraint likely required in academic writing. But its last sentence “imperative that researchers…..discover new ways to minimize their influence on biodiversity.” is an open door that the profiteers in GMO’s will stroll through with smiles on their faces, while saying “Oh yes, we are telling our researchers to be real careful”. 
 The bottom line is that GMO engineering violates the very process, natural selection/evolution, that the typical progressive of today claims to adhere to. That contradiction escapes them. Supposed scientists have even compared genetic engineering to hybridization, when these are not remotely the same. 
 Just because we can do something does not mean that we should. Restraint is not shown by the corporations that have the money and influence to patent our food supply. Our (diminishing )hope is that the great academies of science will finally recognize this appalling abuse of natural processes and do their duty to fight to end it. 
 The article misses to tell that the gene forced into the salmon gene to make the fish grow that big in cold water originates from ocean pout which is a fish which cannot mate with salmon in nature. Also, “AquaBounty’s salmon are all female, grown in land-based tanks, and are sterile due to increased chromosome number.” is incorrect. They TRY to produce sole female sterile offspring, but it’s not 100%. Please inquire the related data from the company. One “escapee” can change our planet’s salmon population forever. I don’t think the existing safety measures are sufficient. I do think it’s irresponsible to produce the fish in the wild or anywhere next to the wild. I don’t want to see it produced, and I certainly don’t want to eat it. I love fish by the way, but I will refuse to buy this. I hope it will have to be labelled, as it contains DNA from another fish species. 
 Dear Yvonne, your view of separating strictly between organisms having received genes from another species and those which are “natural” is against all science, I recommend you to read https://gmoschool.com/2016/04/25/natural-gmos-here-there-and-everywhere/ and the links you can find about David Tribes huge and detailed documentation about natural transgenic organisms. with my best wishes, Klaus Ammann 
 Natural mutations happen sporadically – not involving a human being who plays God while not knowing what they are doing/causing down the road. I don’t have anything against sporadic natural mutations. Thinking further about food and what man has done: Vegetables & grains – Natural mutations aren’t doused in Roundup. 
 Hi i would like to get get more infromation an how GMOs affect the lost of original genes since i am part of a debate group that is against GMOs 
 How can we justify the adulteration of our only food supply? Is is simple mental illness? 
 Suppose we have 100 different commercial varieties of wheat being grown in the United States, all the result of conventional breeding. Each of these varieties is a unique combination of breeding over hundreds of years cultivars and varieties of wheat from around the world. These varieties have been developed and favored due to their superior qualities such as drought resistance, yield, protein content, some varieties grow well in sandy soil, others in more clay soils, etc. Even through conventional breeding, even though each variety might have distinct genetic qualities, they might already share some genetic traits imposed by human breeding, e.g. as dwarfism so that they put more energy into seed production and less into plant height, plus the shorter varieties do not lose yield due to lodging. 
 Now, suppose climate change is spreading the range of a devastating rust disease and farmers are faced with a substantial reduction in yields or the prospect of increased fungicide spraying to control the disease. The worlds cultivated wheats and wild grass relatives are scoured to find varieties, cultivars, or species that are naturally resistant to the rust. Careful study of these plant’s genomes reveals a genetic sequence that confers the resistance to the rust. Plant scientists collect some of these resistant plants and come back to the USA and crossbreed the resistant plants with a host wheat plant and in turn cross the host plant with the 100 varieties of commercial wheat grown in the U.S. Under this scenario, even though each of the 100 commercial wheat varieties still exists and retain all their previous genetic distinctions, the 100 varieties all have the added trait of rust resistance. 
 Also, this new trait, lets say it was discovered in a plant or wild grass in the Russian Steppes, added to our commercial wheat varieties has the potential to be transferred to wild plant species in the U.S. according to the mechanisms of this article. We’ve conferred a rust resistance to grasses that might acquire the trait and these grasses may outcompete grasses that don’t acquire the trait. Now, lets alter the scenario with one twist. Instead of the rust resistant train being introgressed into the 100 varieties of wheat by crossbreeding, it is directly installed into a wheat plant via biotech techniques. That host wheat variety is in turn crossbred with the 100 varieties of wheat to transfer the trait to commercial varieties. Again, we still have the same result we got to with the conventional breeding scenario, 100 varieties of wheat with all their previous genetic distinctions still there but each now having acquired a shared trait of rust resistance. 
 The likelihood and consequences of potential transfer of the rust resistance trait from cultivated varieties of wheat to wild plants is identical in both cases. My question is why is one considered a threat to biodiversity and the other is not? 
 The answer is that they both present the same threat. It is not the process of transferring the trait, whether via genetic engineering or conventional breeding, it is a matter of the trait itself. 
 There seems to be a massive logical hole in your argument. You are arguing that the very fact that beneficial traits may spread through a range of cultivars will lead to reduced biodiversity, correct? But the spread of beneficial traits throughout related populations is how *all* of natural selection works. In essence, you are arguing that natural selection – which has been central to the evolution of all life on earth from the very dawn of life – is bad for life on earth. 
 There is no “get out of jail free card” here just because a human was involved in selecting the advantageous trait. Logically, your argument remains that natural selection is bad for life on earth. 
 Hi i would like to get get more infromation an how GMOs affect the lost of original genes since i am part of a debate group that is against GMOs 
 The potato comes from South America, the Andes, specifically. There, almost every valley has its own variety of potato. I always wondered why the potato famine in Ireland didn’t affect people in South America, and this article now shows me why. 
 Hello, I am Flor. I am writing an argumentative essay for my AP biology class in high school and wanted to how I could argue that GMO crops are helpful towards our economy, health, well-being and environment. I also need to know how these crops could determine our future in agriculture and how this would change our planet. 
 Hello! I appreciate the balance approach to the topic. I am covering introductory GMO & biodiversity in my undergraduate health and wellness course and I am interested in shorter duration videos with a similar approach. Should you be familiar with such resources, I would greatly appreciate your recommendations. 
 Dr. Penny Quinn Professor Saint Mary of the Woods College 
 In Defense of their Food, Ecuadorians Protest Unconstitutional Entry of GMOs 
 The Constitutional Ban 
 Back in 2008, farmers and activists around the world applauded Ecuador and its recently elected President Rafael Correa for banning genetically modified (GM) seeds and crops through its new Constitution. This constitutional ban was the first of its kind, and part of an equally unique and explicit national commitment to food sovereignty. Civil society played a big role in drafting the subsequent legislation. 
 Few however know that as soon as 2012, Correa publicly stated the GM prohibition was a ‘grave mistake’ pushed through by ‘leftist activists’. Ever since, he has been advocating for Ecuador to develop a national GM research center, arguing that Ecuador having its ‘own’ GMOs would entail an exemplary form of food sovereignty. Until recently, this seemed unlikely. But a newly adopted seeds law opened the door for Correa’s plan, however unconstitutional, four days before he left office. 
 Who Controls Our Seeds? 
 After 5 years of debate, in May 2017 the Ecuadorian parliament approved a new law for agrobiodiversity and seeds which was received by civil society with mixed feelings. On the positive side, the law protects traditional, native and farmer’s seeds and declares that these can be exchanged and sold without the need for certification, but at the same time several other articles clearly contradict this right, leaving the door open to future conflict between the State and farmers. The law maintained, and even reinforced, the constitutional ban on genetically modified seeds and crops. 
 A few days after the parliamentary approval of the new law, and awaiting the presidential OK which seemed only a formality, the shocking rumor circulated that Correa would veto it because he wanted to lift the GM ban. All of this happened while the parliament was in transition after February’s elections. 
 The rumor turned out to be true. 
 As soon as this was confirmed, Ecuador’s alert and well- organized farmer groups and food activists moved into action. There were only two weeks left before the parliamentary vote on June 1- very little time to mobilize the public and convince parliamentarians, in a very unfavorable political context. 
 As a priority, we addressed parliamentarians directly through phone calls, letters, whatsapp messages, personal visits and briefing meetings, and informed them of a) the dangers of GM seeds and crops, b) the unconstitutionality of the veto and c) the existing public opposition. Hastily put together petitions were circulated among our networks and generated a stream of letters to parliamentarians from inside and outside Ecuador which, in the words of one of them, was ‘impressive’ considering the short time frame. We also reached out to the press and mobilized a social media campaign, which gave visibility to the widespread protest against the entry of GMOs. 
 On June 1, just days before Correa’s successor Lenin Moreno was to be inaugurated as President, the new parliament approved Correa’s amendment to the law – although notably, all opposition party parliamentarians rejected it or abstained. This step effectively allows genetically modified seeds into the country ‘for research purposes’. Farmer leaders and activists however argue that nobody will invest in research if there are no possibilities to sell the results. 
 The Fight Continues 
 The citizens of Ecuador are not giving up, however. A range of strategies are being developed, including appeals to the Constitutional Court, considering that the new law is clearly anti- constitutional – both the process (the way it was imposed) and its concepts. We are also working with provinces and municipalities to declare ‘GMO free zones’. New alliances are being built, with other people and organizations affected by the new law, including agro exporters who risk losing markets such as in the case of organic banana producers. 
 Across the country, manifestations took place in front of federal and provincial institutions on June 21 in which a great variety of movements and collectives participated. Not coincidentally this was also the day of solstice or Inti Raymi, which in Andean culture marks the start of a new growing cycle. In a first victory, an alliance of cooks and agroecological farmers convinced the mayor of the northern city of Cayambe to announce the district ‘free of GMOs’. 
 Ecuador has a long tradition of strong, peaceful and effective civil resistance. Opposition to genetically modified crops and seeds is widespread. There is growing concern about the quality of food, livelihood and damage to the environment. We will therefore continue to defend our rights to produce and eat healthy and local GM- free food produced by the country’s many small-scale men and women farmers. 
 By Janneke Bruil, Colectivo Agroecológico, and Javier Carrera-Andrade, Red de Guardianes de Semillas (Ecuador) 
 In rural Paraguay, women are on the frontlines of a ‘race against time’ to save native seeds 
 Amid the spread of industrial farming, transgenic crops and seed patents, rural women are conserving native varieties and teaching others about agro-ecology. 
 Native seeds preserved in rural Paraguay. Photo: Maria Sanz Dominguez.In Chacore, about 200 kilometers east of Asunción, Paraguay's capital, Ceferina Guerrero, 68, walks by shelves of carefully-labelled plastic bottles and metal drums. Each contains a native seed variety essential to the diets of rural communities. 
 Their labels list seed names in Guarani, an indigenous language and Paraguay’s second official language, as well as in Spanish. Guerrero introduces them warmly, as a mother would do with her children: this one is a bean, this one is peanut, this is corn. 
 Known as Ña Cefe in her community, Guerrero says her surname (which means 'warrior' in Spanish) fits her like a glove. She is one of the founders of the Coordination of Rural and Indigenous Women in Paraguay (Conamuri). 
 Conamuri began as a small group in the 1990s. Today its members include women from more than 200 rural communities in Paraguay and it’s also connected to allies around the world as part of the international peasants’ movement La Via Campesina. 
 Still, Guerrero says, “we should not forget our first objective”: collecting and preserving native seeds across the country. She describes this as a race against time – and the expansion of large-scale, industrial agriculture. 
 “Now we have lost almost 60% of native varieties,” she told me. “We even have communities where you can’t find any.” 
 “Now we have lost almost 60% of native varieties. We even have communities where you cannot find any.” 
 Meanwhile, the world lost 75% of its seed diversity over the twentieth century. Now,just nine crops comprise 66% of global agricultural production. Only three of these – wheat, rice and corn – account for almost half of the world population’s daily calories. 
 These trends have alarmed NGOs, rural organisations and international institutions. Maintaining biodiversity, the FAO insists, is “fundamental” for food security and the ability to adapt to population growth and climate change. 
 Biodiversity loss also has “specific impacts” on women who have “traditionally been the keepers of profound knowledge of plants, animals and ecological processes,” added the IPES international expert panel on sustainable food systems in 2016. 
 Guerrero holds corn seeds, in Chacore, Paraguay. Photo: Maria Sanz Dominguez. In Paraguay, just 5% of the population owns 90% of the land. Most of this is used by huge agribusinesses to grow just a handful of crops (including soybeans, wheat, rice and corn) on vast plantations for export internationally. 
 Last year, the country imported almost 24,000 tons of seeds. Most were for these export crops. Less than 1% were fruit or vegetable seeds, mostly potatoes. Others included Paraguay's national fruit: mburucuya (passion fruit). 
 Amid corporate pressure on farming and food production, women who preserve native varieties, like Guerrero in Chacore, are “rare, like needles in a haystack,” said Inés Franceschelli, a researcher for the NGO Heñoi ('to germinate'). 
 “And if Paraguay is so dependent [on foreign companies] for such a basic thing as food,” Franceschelli added, “it means that this is a subordinate country.” 
 “If Paraguay is so dependent [on foreign companies] for such a basic thing as food, it means that this is a subordinate country.” 
 Following an intense campaign of mega-mergers since 2016, a small group of just three giant corporations (Bayer-Monsanto, DowDuPont, and Chemchina-Syngenta) now control more than half of the world’s seed market. 
 These seed and agrochemical giants are also active in Paraguay, where they have been allowed to plant transgenic corn, cotton and soy. 
 Guerrero told me that native seeds grow without insecticides, while some transgenic seeds may “produce a nice plant, with nice fruits, but if you collect the seed and plant it again, it would not germinate. You cannot reuse their seeds, and you will have to buy them again and again." 
 What she described sounds like the effect of a controversial genetic modification that produces sterile seeds once the plant has given its fruits. 
 Sometimes called “Terminator seeds,” some NGOs and rural organisations warn that the use of Genetic Use Restriction Technologies (GURT) can displace native varieties and threaten local food security. 
 The world’s biggest seed companies are all believed to have patents for such technologies, though they deny dealing in them. 
 Monsanto, for instance, has said that it “has never commercialised a biotech trait that resulted in sterile – or ‘Terminator’ – seeds” in food crops and that it has “no plans or research that would violate this commitment.” 
 Ceferina Guerrero, in Chacore, Paraguay. Photo: Maria Sanz Dominguez. Currently, Paraguay is also being pressured to adopt the controversial ‘UPOV 91’ seed convention as part of a free trade agreement being negotiated between the European Union and South American commercial bloc Mercosur. 
 Rural organisations fear that this could enable legal prosecutions against country-people for sharing or exchanging their native seeds, as they will not be able to meet the requirements for seed registration under this convention. 
 Over the last decade, Conamuri developed its own proposals for laws to protect native and creole seeds (which are not native but have adapted to local conditions over centuries). These were rejected in 2012, after the impeachment of president Fernando Lugo (seen as likely to accept them). 
 “Then we understood that political power was unstable, so giving the government control over our seeds was not a guarantee for our food sovereignty and security,” Conamuri’s Perla Álvarez told me. “Seeds must be in country-people's hands.” 
 Native seeds in a seed exchange in Asunción. Photo: Maria Sanz Dominguez.“Country-people hold power in their traditional lifestyles,” adds Franceschelli, from the NGO Heñoi, from the power of healthy nutrition and sustainable land management to that of “living without depending on corporations.” 
 “The resistance against standardisation and globalisation is located in rural and indigenous communities across the world," she said. "And this resistance is stronger in women.” 
 “The resistance is located in rural and indigenous communities across the world. And this resistance is stronger in women.” 
 Across Paraguay, amid the spread of industrial farming, transgenic crops and seed patents, rural women like Guerrero are on the frontlines of the fight to save native varieties before it’s too late. 
 They are producing 'green fertilisers' that help farmland to recover for the next season, and teaching others about agro-ecological farming that takes natural ecosystems into account and encourages planting a diversity of crops. 
 They are carefully labelling containers storing the same varieties of corn their grandmothers used to cook, long ago. They are also rediscovering and preserving native seeds that haven’t been used for many years. 
 Native seeds collected and classified by Conamuri members. Photo: Maria Sanz Dominguez.In Chacore, Semilla Róga (“the house of the seeds”) is a Conamuri project that hosts country-people from across Paraguay each month to exchange and learn to preserve native and creole seed varieties. 
 Here, Guerrero teaches techniques on how to grow food without pesticides or insecticides. She also has her own seed store at home, preserving more than 60 seed varieties and sharing them with her neighbours. 
 “Since the beginning of agriculture,” she says, “native seeds were linked to women, who were the first ones to collect, keep and plant seeds.” 
 The Semilla Róga project also aims to preserve the knowledge and traditions of communities that use native seeds. “Each corn variety is suitable for a different kind of food, and belongs to a different group of people,” Álvarez explained. 
 “For instance, indigenous people such as the avá and mbya guaraní have coloured corn for ritual use, so the plant also has cultural value,” she said. 
 Natural medicines derived from raw seeds are also popular in Paraguay, where they are often used as cheaper alternatives to conventional drugs. (Coriander seed, for instance, is used to raise natural defenses after illnesses). 
 “If we lose kuratu [coriander], if we lose andai [a local variety of pumpkin], we are losing medicine, and we are also losing our food, a part of our traditions as country-people, and a part of our culture and our identity,” Guerrero told me. 
 Holding a big ear of native red corn, Guerrero explains that it should be harvested during the full moon, when the atmosphere is less humid. She shows me how to collect the little seeds on both ends for food; those in the middle will be stored for planting in the next season. 
 “Some people ask me how many dollars I spend per day. I do not understand that question, because I produce what I need, and for weeks I do not spend a dollar,” she says. “When you have seeds at home, you will never be hungry.” 
 * This article is part of a series on women's rights and economic justice from 50.50 and the Association for Women's Rights in Development (AWID), featuring stories on the impacts of extractive industries and corporate power, and the importance of tax justice for the rights of women, trans and gender non-conforming people. 
 About the author 
 Maria Sanz Dominguez is a freelance journalist based in Asuncion (Paraguay) since 2014. Former correspondent for international news agency Agencia EFE, she currently writes for international feminist media such as Pikara Magazine and the LGBTIQ news agency Presentes. She also works as a camerawoman for Agence France Presse. She is a 2018 50.50 women's rights and corporate power reporting fellow. 
 This article is published under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International licence. If you have any queries about republishing please contact us. Please check individual images for licensing details. 
 We encourage anyone to comment, please consult the oD commenting guidelines if you have any questions. 
 100% independent media covering gender, sexuality and social justice – worldwide. Today we need this more than ever. Every £1 goes into producing and publishing more in-depth and critical journalism, commentary and analysis from women from around the globe. Contribute today. 
 Tracking the backlash 
 Growing and globalising networks of conservative and fundamentalist groups are pushing back against our sexual and reproductive rights. 50.50 investigates. 
 50.50 columnists 
 Tiffany Kagure MugoAFRO-SEXUALITY SPEAKEASYTalking about sex, sexual identity and sexuality in an easy and lubricated way, taking some of the serious out of the sexual and reproductive health and rights conversation. 
 Claudia TorrisiL'ITALIA FEMMINISTAMonthly features about gender and human rights in Italy. Reporting on sexism, racism, poverty and other connected systems of oppression. Mediterranean intersectionality. 
 openDemocracy Ltd, The Print House, 18 Ashwin Street, London, E8 3DL. Tel: +44 (0) 207 193 0676 
 openDemocracy is an independent, non-profit global media outlet, covering world affairs, ideas and culture, which seeks to challenge power and encourage democratic debate across the world. We publish high-quality investigative reporting and analysis; we train and mentor journalists and wider civil society; we publish in Russian, Arabic, Spanish and Portuguese and English. 
 LIMA, Peru — Are genetically modified crops “Franken-foods” or the answer to global hunger and climate change? 
 That is the dilemma dividing Latin America, where vast quantities of GM crops are grown. Ecuador’s constitution actually prohibits them and Peru recently voted for a 10-year moratorium. 
 Outside the US, no region has a greater expanse of agricultural land sown with genetically modified organisms (GMOs) than South America. 
 Together, Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay have roughly 120 million acres of GM crops, principally soybean, but also significant amounts of corn. 
 Advocates say they increase yields, allowing the world to feed a growing population, and will even help farmers adapt to climate change. 
 But critics have long warned of the dangers, both to the environment and human health, as well as the way so-called GMOs can make farmers dependent on the corporations that provide the seeds and complementary products. 
 Environmentalists are concerned that GM crops could trigger new allergies, or could cross-pollinate with nearby non-GM crops, allowing their manipulated gene sequences to enter wild plants, with unknown but potentially far-reaching results. 
 The latter happened in 2003 in Mexico — where corn was first cultivated by humans and which still has an unrivaled diversity of wild and domesticated maize — when UC Berkeley scientists discovered DNA from GM corn had entered into local crops. 
 “The impact has been brutal, not just because they are GMOs but because of the herbicides that they need,” Carlos Vicente, of the Argentine branch of Grain, a nonprofit that advocates for small farmers, told GlobalPost. 
 “It is all about Monsanto selling more seeds and agrichemicals and hooking the farmer,” he added, in a reference to the St. Louis, Missouri-based corporation that has largely spearheaded the GM revolution. 
 According to Vicente, 60 percent of Argentina’s entire agricultural surface — 48 million acres — is now used to grow GM soy, mainly for export for both human consumption and as livestock feed. 
 For a country once known as the “breadbasket of the world,” that represents a huge departure from its traditional staples of beef and wheat. The change began in 1996, when — without any legislation or government oversight — the first GM soy was planted. 
 According to Vicente, Argentina’s massive soy harvest in turn requires an annual dowsing of 50 million gallons of Roundup, an herbicide manufactured by Monsanto, which has provided many of the GM soy seeds to Argentine farmers. 
 Meanwhile, the government of President Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner has also agreed to Monsanto’s demands that farmers be banned from re-sowing seeds from its patented crops, a similar law to that in the US, where growers must buy more from the company after every harvest. 
 That measure hangs in the balance, Vicente said, after a backlash from environmental groups and furious farmers, although Fernandez still hopes to pass it. 
 But not everything is plain sailing for GMOs in Latin America. In November, Peru’s congress approved a 10-year moratorium on the import and cultivation of GM seeds after a protracted debate. 
 The previous government of President Alan Garcia came close to allowing the sowing of GM crops in Peru after heavy lobbying from agricultural corporations. 
 But Garcia was outflanked by the nation’s burgeoning gastronomic movement. 
 Several of the nation’s leading chefs — a revered profession here — warned that GMOs would undermine the diversity of Peru’s native crops, on which they depend for their culinary creations, and its rapidly growing exports of organic produce. 
 Instead, they argued, Peru should be looking to empower small farmers to continue producing a wide variety of high-quality, natural crops and effectively act as the custodians of that rich genetic reservoir. They also insisted that GM produce does not taste or look better than natural varieties. 
 “There are a huge number of plants in Peru with all kinds of properties which we are not currently making the most of as it is, although we did previously and could again in the future,” top Lima chef Pedro Miguel Schiaffino told GlobalPost. 
 “What we should be doing is re-evaluating and rescuing them,” he added. “In a country as bio-diverse as ours, GMOs make no sense.” 
 GlobalPost contacted several of the companies that market GM seeds in Latin America. Cargill and Monsanto failed to respond, and Dupont said its staff was too busy to discuss the matter. 
 However, Richard Breum, a spokesman for German pharmaceuticals giant Bayer, did provide written answers. He described GM crops as being “the most intensively studied plants in the world.” That research has cleared them of being harmful to human health, he said. 
 Breum acknowledged the criticism that GM crops have compromised genetic diversity but blamed that on modern large-scale agricultural techniques rather than GMOs. “Farmers can decide for themselves,” he added. 
 Yet those arguments leave many unconvinced. Costa Rican Congressman Claudio Monge said he was increasingly confident that legislators there were on the verge of rejecting an application from a Monsanto subsidiary to grow GM corn. 
 “Costa Rica is a small country that depends heavily on ecotourism,” Monge told GlobalPost. “We have 6 percent of the world’s biodiversity right here and all the genetic diversity of crops we need naturally. We should not be chopping down forest to sow GM corn or pineapples.” 
 Both Peru and Costa Rica are known for their biodiversity, with each country earning valuable tourist dollars from their tropical rain forests, which are also a source of national pride. 
 And they promote distinct agricultural models from Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay — and most of the US — where a single crop is grown on huge fields that stretch to the horizon. 
 But with many of those vast areas dedicated exclusively to GM harvests, “Franken-foods” are now an integral part of the global food supply. And 
 it may only be time that tells what their effects on human health and the environment really are. 
 We use cookies to understand how you use our site and to improve your experience. To learn more, review our Cookie Policy. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies and Privacy Policy. 
 Support independent, nonprofit journalism. Make a recurring monthly donation today. 
 March Against Monsanto, Vancouver, Canada; May 25, 2013 
 The March Against Monsanto is an international grassroots movement and protest against Monsanto corporation, a producer of genetically modified organism (GMOs) and Roundup, a glyphosate-based herbicide.[1] The movement was founded by Tami Canal in response to the failure of California Proposition 37, a ballot initiative which would have required labeling food products made from GMOs. Advocates support mandatory labeling laws for food made from GMOs.[2][3] 
 The initial march took place on May 25, 2013. The number of protesters who took part is uncertain; figures of "hundreds of thousands"[4] and the organizers' estimate of "two million"[5] were variously cited. Events took place in between 330[3] and 436[5] cities around the world, mostly in the United States.[3][6][7] Many protests occurred in Southern California, and some participants carried signs expressing support for mandatory labeling of GMOs that read "Label GMOs, It's Our Right to Know", and "Real Food 4 Real People".[6] Canal said that the movement would continue its "anti-GMO cause" beyond the initial event.[5] Further marches occurred in October 2013 and in May 2014 and 2015. 
 Monsanto said that it respected people's rights to express their opinion on the topic, but maintained that its seeds improved agriculture by helping farmers produce more from their land while conserving resources, such as water and energy.[5] The company reiterated that genetically modified foods were safe and improved crop yields.[12] Similar sentiments were expressed by the Hawaii Crop Improvement Association, of which Monsanto is a member.[13][14] 
 Monsanto, headquartered in Creve Coeur, Missouri, is the largest producer of genetically engineered seed. Monsanto has been involved in high-profile lawsuits, as both plaintiff and defendant, and its current and former biotechnology products, its lobbying of government agencies, and its history as a chemical company have made it a controversial corporation.[15] In the United States, the majority of corn, soybean, and cotton is genetically modified. 
 Prior to the march, Monsanto's CEO Hugh Grant had accused opponents of genetically modified foods of wanting to block others from choosing more affordable food options, thus being guilty of "elitism".[16][17] Advocacy groups such as Greenpeace,[18]The Non-GMO Project, and the Organic Consumers Association say that risks of GM food have not been adequately identified and managed, and they have questioned the objectivity of regulatory authorities. They have expressed concerns about the objectivity of regulators and the rigor of the regulatory process, possible contamination of non-GM foods, effects of GMOs on the environment and nature, and the consolidation of control of the food supply in companies that make and sell GMOs.[citation needed] 
 There is a scientific consensus[19][20][21][22] that currently available food derived from GM crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food,[23][24][25][26][27] but that each GM food needs to be tested on a case-by-case basis before introduction.[28][29][30] Nonetheless, members of the public are much less likely than scientists to perceive GM foods as safe.[31][32][33][34] The legal and regulatory status of GM foods varies by country, with some nations banning or restricting them, and others permitting them with widely differing degrees of regulation.[35][36][37][38] 
 Although labeling of genetically modified organism (GMO) products in the marketplace is required in many countries, it is not required in the United States and no distinction between marketed GMO and non-GMO foods is recognized by the US FDA.[39] 
 Founder Tami Canal, March Against Monsanto, Salt Lake City, Utah 
 Tami Monroe Canal, a homemaker and mother of two daughters, was living as a resident in California when Proposition 37, a ballot initiative that would have required labels on products containing genetically engineered food, was rejected by voters in November 2012. Monsanto spent $8.1 million opposing the passage of Proposition 37, making it the largest donor against the initiative.[40] The combined total spent by food industry advocacy groups on the campaign to defeat Proposition 37 was $45 million.[41] Canal credits Proposition 37 with "opening her eyes" to GMOs for the first time.[42] 
 Soon after, Canal moved to Utah where she had difficulty finding the same kinds of fresh foods and farmers' markets she had left behind in California. "I became increasingly angry every time I would go to the grocery store and spend a small fortune to ensure I wasn't feeding my family poison", she recalled.[41] Canal was not only angry about the failure of Proposition 37 and frustrated with trying to find reasonably priced organic food, but she was also concerned about the health of her children.[42][43] 
 Talking about her personal motivations for starting the movement, Canal told the Salt Lake City Weekly, "Companies like Kellogg's and General Mills are putting things like Fruit Loops on the market that are basically 100 percent genetically engineered ingredients. And that's marketed to our kids."[42] Out of her anger, frustration, and concerns for the health of her children, Canal developed the idea for a "March Against Monsanto" social media campaign.[41][42] 
 Canal started a Facebook social media campaign on February 28, 2013. She stated: "For too long, Monsanto has been the benefactor of corporate subsidies and political favoritism ... Organic and small farmers suffer losses while Monsanto continues to forge its monopoly over the world's food supply, including exclusive patenting rights over seeds and genetic makeup." She argued that Monsanto benefited from corporate subsidies and political favoritism and that its patent rights over the genetic makeup of seeds resulted in losses to small and organic farmers.[44] Activists Emilie Rensink and Nick Bernabe worked with Canal to promote the march on various social media sites.[44] By May 21, the Facebook page had attracted 85,000 members with approximately 110,000 "likes" and about 40,000 daily visitors.[45][46] 
 President Barack Obama's signing, on March 26, 2013, of the Farmer Assurance Provision, which is Section 735 of US H.R. 933, provided further motivation for the protesters.[2] The section of the bill is called the "Monsanto Protection Act" by critics, and it authorizes the United States Department of Agriculture to allow the planting and cultivation of genetically modified food while environmental reviews are being completed, even if there is a legal ruling against their approval.[3][47] Independent US Senator Bernie Sanders attempted, unsuccessfully, to introduce Senate Amendment 965 to the Agriculture Reform, Food, and Jobs Act of 2013, legislation that would require labeling of GM food products. Sanders criticized Monsanto for its opposition to his initiative, saying that Monsanto and other biotech companies "were able to gather a whole lot of support in the Senate".[10] 
 Prior to the march, the March Against Monsanto group hosted an essay on their website highlighting what they saw as lack of attention to the Act in the mainstream media.[48] Dave Murphy, founder of Food Democracy Now!, called the controversy over H.R. 933 "the turning point in the debate on political lobbying and genetic engineering in the U.S." and he described the March Against Monsanto as raising "one of the most pressing issues of our time".[49] 
 Protest signs from the March Against Monsanto, Stockholm, Sweden 
 On May 25, 2013, demonstrations protesting genetically modified crops took place around the world. Events took place in between 330[3] and 436[5] cities around the world, mostly in the United States.[3][6][7] The number of protesters who took part is uncertain; figures of "hundreds of thousands"[4] and the organizers' estimate of "two million"[5] were variously cited. 
 In Southern California, protests occurred in Los Angeles, including Venice, Long Beach, and San Diego. In Los Angeles, protesters marched from Pershing Square to City Hall. Some carried signs expressing support for mandatory labeling of GMOs that read "Label GMOs, It's Our Right to Know", and "Real Food 4 Real People". Dorothy Muehlmann, organizer of the L.A. march, said that they were marching to raise awareness. "This is not just a 'boo Monsanto' protest. We want more people to know so they can make their own decisions."[6][10][50] 
 Environmental journalist John Upton of Grist magazine noted that the march took place two days after Senate Amendment 965, introduced by US Senator Bernie Sanders in an attempt to allow states to label GMO foods, was rejected. "Any U.S. senators paying attention to what was happening in the entire world over the weekend may have noticed a teensy disconnect between their protectionist votes for Monsanto and global discontent with the GMO giant," Upton wrote.[51] 
 The March Against Monsanto published a list of concerns and its positions on a number of GMO issues on its website. According to the group, the protests were held to address health and safety issues, perceived conflicts of interest, and agricultural, environmental, and legislative concerns.[52] 
 The marchers expressed the belief that GM foods can adversely affect human health,[53][54] with some of the protesters asserting that such foods cause cancer, infertility, and birth defects.[55] Protesters also asserted that GMOs might harm the environment, and play a role in declining bee populations.[56] 
 The protesters argued that the Farmer Assurance Provision legislation allows Monsanto to ignore court rulings,[57][58] and have called for the bill's repeal.[59] They believe that the legislation has drawn what they call "a blurry line between industry and government".[17][60] 
 They also believe that there has been a conflict of interest between former employees of Monsanto who work for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, and that Monsanto has used their patent rights to create a monopoly of the food supply which has resulted in economic losses by small farmers. Activist and journalist Emilie Rensink, who helped organize the march, said that in her view the appointment of ex-Monsanto executives to head the FDA has resulted in political favoritism, including Monsanto subsidies which have given them an unfair advantage over small farmers. Organizer Canal points to Michael Taylor, a lawyer who has spent the last few decades moving between Monsanto and the FDA and USDA, saying that she believes that US food regulatory agencies are so deeply embedded with Monsanto that it's useless to attempt to affect change through governmental channels.[17] 
 No major media outlets in the US provided live coverage of the event. AlterNet expressed the opinion that mainstream coverage of the event was "sparse", and it criticized what it characterized as "the mainstream media's decision to ignore thousands of people marching down the nation's busiest thoroughfares".[61] Radio host Thom Hartmann compared what he saw as scant coverage of the protests, which he attributed to the media avoiding topics that might make their advertisers appear in a negative light, to the greater media attention garnered by small Tea Party rallies.[62] 
 Monsanto said that it respected people's rights to express their opinion on the topic, but maintained that its seeds improved agriculture by helping farmers produce more from their land while conserving resources, such as water and energy.[5] The company reiterated that genetically engineered foods were safe and improved crop yields.[12] Similar sentiments were expressed by the Hawaii Crop Improvement Association, of which Monsanto is a member.[13][14] 
 A second protest was organized and held on October 12, 2013. The group Occupy Monsanto estimated that over 400 marches were held worldwide,[63] with other reports estimating participation at 500 events in 50 different countries.[64] The October march was scheduled to coincide with World Food Day,[64] and came after Monsanto executives had been awarded the World Food Prize;[65] the Des Moines, Iowa protest on October 12 took place in front of the World Food Prize building to oppose this award.[66] Monsanto commented on the protests with a statement reasserting the safety of genetically modified food.[67] 
 Further protests were held in May 2014[68] and in "upwards of 400 cities in more than 40 countries" in May 2015.[69][70] 
 March Against Myths About Modification (MAMyths) is a grassroots organization set up to counter the March Against Monsanto protests, and the associated myths told about Genetically Engineered (GMO) crops and foods. MAMyths believes that the misconceptions associated with GMO's are harmful to the public because they influence public perception, which in turn influences policy.[71] 
 ^Murray, Ryan (8 June 2013). "Backlash growing against GMOs". Daily Inter Lake. McClatchy-Tribune Regional News. Retrieved 18 June 2013; Milner, Conan (21 May 2013) 
 ^Nicolia, Alessandro; Manzo, Alberto; Veronesi, Fabio; Rosellini, Daniele (2013). "An overview of the last 10 years of genetically engineered crop safety research"(PDF). Critical Reviews in Biotechnology. 34 (1): 77–88. doi:10.3109/07388551.2013.823595. PMID24041244. We have reviewed the scientific literature on GE crop safety for the last 10 years that catches the scientific consensus matured since GE plants became widely cultivated worldwide, and we can conclude that the scientific research conducted so far has not detected any significant hazard directly connected with the use of GM crops. 
 The literature about Biodiversity and the GE food/feed consumption has sometimes resulted in animated debate regarding the suitability of the experimental designs, the choice of the statistical methods or the public accessibility of data. Such debate, even if positive and part of the natural process of review by the scientific community, has frequently been distorted by the media and often used politically and inappropriately in anti-GE crops campaigns. 
 ^"State of Food and Agriculture 2003–2004. Agricultural Biotechnology: Meeting the Needs of the Poor. Health and environmental impacts of transgenic crops". Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Retrieved February 8, 2016. Currently available transgenic crops and foods derived from them have been judged safe to eat and the methods used to test their safety have been deemed appropriate. These conclusions represent the consensus of the scientific evidence surveyed by the ICSU (2003) and they are consistent with the views of the World Health Organization (WHO, 2002). These foods have been assessed for increased risks to human health by several national regulatory authorities (inter alia, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, China, the United Kingdom and the United States) using their national food safety procedures (ICSU). To date no verifiable untoward toxic or nutritionally deleterious effects resulting from the consumption of foods derived from genetically modified crops have been discovered anywhere in the world (GM Science Review Panel). Many millions of people have consumed foods derived from GM plants - mainly maize, soybean and oilseed rape - without any observed adverse effects (ICSU). 
 ^Ronald, Pamela (May 5, 2011). "Plant Genetics, Sustainable Agriculture and Global Food Security". Genetics. 188 (1): 11–20. doi:10.1534/genetics.111.128553. PMC3120150. PMID21546547. There is broad scientific consensus that genetically engineered crops currently on the market are safe to eat. After 14 years of cultivation and a cumulative total of 2 billion acres planted, no adverse health or environmental effects have resulted from commercialization of genetically engineered crops (Board on Agriculture and Natural Resources, Committee on Environmental Impacts Associated with Commercialization of Transgenic Plants, National Research Council and Division on Earth and Life Studies 2002). Both the U.S. National Research Council and the Joint Research Centre (the European Union's scientific and technical research laboratory and an integral part of the European Commission) have concluded that there is a comprehensive body of knowledge that adequately addresses the food safety issue of genetically engineered crops (Committee on Identifying and Assessing Unintended Effects of Genetically Engineered Foods on Human Health and National Research Council 2004; European Commission Joint Research Centre 2008). These and other recent reports conclude that the processes of genetic engineering and conventional breeding are no different in terms of unintended consequences to human health and the environment (European Commission Directorate-General for Research and Innovation 2010). 
 Domingo, José L.; Bordonaba, Jordi Giné (2011). "A literature review on the safety assessment of genetically modified plants"(PDF). Environment International. 37 (4): 734–742. doi:10.1016/j.envint.2011.01.003. PMID21296423. In spite of this, the number of studies specifically focused on safety assessment of GM plants is still limited. However, it is important to remark that for the first time, a certain equilibrium in the number of research groups suggesting, on the basis of their studies, that a number of varieties of GM products (mainly maize and soybeans) are as safe and nutritious as the respective conventional non-GM plant, and those raising still serious concerns, was observed. Moreover, it is worth mentioning that most of the studies demonstrating that GM foods are as nutritional and safe as those obtained by conventional breeding, have been performed by biotechnology companies or associates, which are also responsible of commercializing these GM plants. Anyhow, this represents a notable advance in comparison with the lack of studies published in recent years in scientific journals by those companies. 
 Krimsky, Sheldon (2015). "An Illusory Consensus behind GMO Health Assessment"(PDF). Science, Technology, & Human Values. 40 (6): 883–914. doi:10.1177/0162243915598381. Archived from the original(PDF) on 2016-02-07. Retrieved 2016-07-08. I began this article with the testimonials from respected scientists that there is literally no scientific controversy over the health effects of GMOs. My investigation into the scientific literature tells another story. 
 And contrast: 
 Panchin, Alexander Y.; Tuzhikov, Alexander I. (January 14, 2016). "Published GMO studies find no evidence of harm when corrected for multiple comparisons". Critical Reviews in Biotechnology. 37 (2): 213–217. doi:10.3109/07388551.2015.1130684. ISSN0738-8551. PMID26767435. Here, we show that a number of articles some of which have strongly and negatively influenced the public opinion on GM crops and even provoked political actions, such as GMO embargo, share common flaws in the statistical evaluation of the data. Having accounted for these flaws, we conclude that the data presented in these articles does not provide any substantial evidence of GMO harm. 
 The presented articles suggesting possible harm of GMOs received high public attention. However, despite their claims, they actually weaken the evidence for the harm and lack of substantial equivalency of studied GMOs. We emphasize that with over 1783 published articles on GMOs over the last 10 years it is expected that some of them should have reported undesired differences between GMOs and conventional crops even if no such differences exist in reality. 
 and 
 Yang, Y.T.; Chen, B. (2016). "Governing GMOs in the USA: science, law and public health". Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 96 (6): 1851–1855. doi:10.1002/jsfa.7523. PMID26536836. It is therefore not surprising that efforts to require labeling and to ban GMOs have been a growing political issue in the USA (citing Domingo and Bordonaba, 2011). 
 Overall, a broad scientific consensus holds that currently marketed GM food poses no greater risk than conventional food... Major national and international science and medical associations have stated that no adverse human health effects related to GMO food have been reported or substantiated in peer-reviewed literature to date. 
 Despite various concerns, today, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the World Health Organization, and many independent international science organizations agree that GMOs are just as safe as other foods. Compared with conventional breeding techniques, genetic engineering is far more precise and, in most cases, less likely to create an unexpected outcome. 
 ^"Statement by the AAAS Board of Directors On Labeling of Genetically Modified Foods"(PDF). American Association for the Advancement of Science. October 20, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2016. The EU, for example, has invested more than €300 million in research on the biosafety of GMOs. Its recent report states: "The main conclusion to be drawn from the efforts of more than 130 research projects, covering a period of more than 25 years of research and involving more than 500 independent research groups, is that biotechnology, and in particular GMOs, are not per se more risky than e.g. conventional plant breeding technologies." The World Health Organization, the American Medical Association, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, the British Royal Society, and every other respected organization that has examined the evidence has come to the same conclusion: consuming foods containing ingredients derived from GM crops is no riskier than consuming the same foods containing ingredients from crop plants modified by conventional plant improvement techniques. 
 ^"AMA Report on Genetically Modified Crops and Foods (online summary)". American Medical Association. January 2001. Retrieved March 19, 2016. A report issued by the scientific council of the American Medical Association (AMA) says that no long-term health effects have been detected from the use of transgenic crops and genetically modified foods, and that these foods are substantially equivalent to their conventional counterparts. (from online summary prepared by ISAAA)" "Crops and foods produced using recombinant DNA techniques have been available for fewer than 10 years and no long-term effects have been detected to date. These foods are substantially equivalent to their conventional counterparts. (from original report by AMA: [1]) 
 "REPORT 2 OF THE COUNCIL ON SCIENCE AND PUBLIC HEALTH (A-12): Labeling of Bioengineered Foods"(PDF). American Medical Association. 2012. Archived from the original on September 7, 2012. Retrieved March 19, 2016. Bioengineered foods have been consumed for close to 20 years, and during that time, no overt consequences on human health have been reported and/or substantiated in the peer-reviewed literature.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) 
 ^"Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms: United States. Public and Scholarly Opinion". Library of Congress. June 9, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2016. Several scientific organizations in the US have issued studies or statements regarding the safety of GMOs indicating that there is no evidence that GMOs present unique safety risks compared to conventionally bred products. These include the National Research Council, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and the American Medical Association. Groups in the US opposed to GMOs include some environmental organizations, organic farming organizations, and consumer organizations. A substantial number of legal academics have criticized the US's approach to regulating GMOs. 
 ^Genetically Engineered Crops: Experiences and Prospects. The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (US). 2016. p. 149. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Overall finding on purported adverse effects on human health of foods derived from GE crops: On the basis of detailed examination of comparisons of currently commercialized GE with non-GE foods in compositional analysis, acute and chronic animal toxicity tests, long-term data on health of livestock fed GE foods, and human epidemiological data, the committee found no differences that implicate a higher risk to human health from GE foods than from their non-GE counterparts. 
 ^"Frequently asked questions on genetically modified foods". World Health Organization. Retrieved February 8, 2016. Different GM organisms include different genes inserted in different ways. This means that individual GM foods and their safety should be assessed on a case-by-case basis and that it is not possible to make general statements on the safety of all GM foods. 
 GM foods currently available on the international market have passed safety assessments and are not likely to present risks for human health. In addition, no effects on human health have been shown as a result of the consumption of such foods by the general population in the countries where they have been approved. Continuous application of safety assessments based on the Codex Alimentarius principles and, where appropriate, adequate post market monitoring, should form the basis for ensuring the safety of GM foods. 
 "Genetically modified foods and health: a second interim statement"(PDF). British Medical Association. March 2004. Retrieved March 21, 2016. In our view, the potential for GM foods to cause harmful health effects is very small and many of the concerns expressed apply with equal vigour to conventionally derived foods. However, safety concerns cannot, as yet, be dismissed completely on the basis of information currently available. 
 When seeking to optimise the balance between benefits and risks, it is prudent to err on the side of caution and, above all, learn from accumulating knowledge and experience. Any new technology such as genetic modification must be examined for possible benefits and risks to human health and the environment. As with all novel foods, safety assessments in relation to GM foods must be made on a case-by-case basis. 
 Members of the GM jury project were briefed on various aspects of genetic modification by a diverse group of acknowledged experts in the relevant subjects. The GM jury reached the conclusion that the sale of GM foods currently available should be halted and the moratorium on commercial growth of GM crops should be continued. These conclusions were based on the precautionary principle and lack of evidence of any benefit. The Jury expressed concern over the impact of GM crops on farming, the environment, food safety and other potential health effects. 
 The Royal Society review (2002) concluded that the risks to human health associated with the use of specific viral DNA sequences in GM plants are negligible, and while calling for caution in the introduction of potential allergens into food crops, stressed the absence of evidence that commercially available GM foods cause clinical allergic manifestations. The BMA shares the view that that there is no robust evidence to prove that GM foods are unsafe but we endorse the call for further research and surveillance to provide convincing evidence of safety and benefit. 
 ^Funk, Cary; Rainie, Lee (January 29, 2015). "Public and Scientists' Views on Science and Society". Pew Research Center. Retrieved February 24, 2016. The largest differences between the public and the AAAS scientists are found in beliefs about the safety of eating genetically modified (GM) foods. Nearly nine-in-ten (88%) scientists say it is generally safe to eat GM foods compared with 37% of the general public, a difference of 51 percentage points. 
 ^Bashshur, Ramona (February 2013). "FDA and Regulation of GMOs". American Bar Association. Retrieved February 24, 2016. 
 "Worldwide March Against Monsanto". Progressive 77(7):10–13. July 2013. ISSN0033-0736 
 Organisers celebrate huge global turnout and say they will continue until Monsanto and other GM manufacturers listen 
 Associated Press 
 Sun 26 May 2013 01.26 BST First published on Sun 26 May 2013 01.26 BST 
 Organisers say that two million people marched in protest against seed giant Monsanto in hundreds of rallies across the US and in more than 50 other countries on Saturday. 
 "March Against Monsanto" protesters say they wanted to call attention to the dangers posed by genetically modified food and the food giants that produce it. Founder and organiser Tami Canal said protests were held in 436 cities across 52 countries. 
 Genetically modified plants are grown from seeds that are engineered to resist insecticides and herbicides, add nutritional benefits, or otherwise improve crop yields and increase the global food supply. Most corn, soybean and cotton crops grown in the United States today have been genetically modified. But some say genetically modified organisms can lead to serious health conditions and harm the environment. 
 The use of GMOs has been a growing issue of contention in recent years, with health advocates pushing for mandatory labelling of genetically modified products even though the federal government and many scientists say the technology is safe. 
 The "March Against Monsanto" movement began just a few months ago, when Canal created a Facebook page on 28 February calling for a rally against the company's practices. "If I had gotten 3,000 people to join me, I would have considered that a success," she said Saturday. Instead, she said, two million responded to her message. 
 Together with Seattle blogger and activist Emilie Rensink and Nick Bernabe of Anti-Media.org, Canal worked with A Revolt.org digital anarchy to promote international awareness of the event. She called the turnout "incredible" and credited social media for being a vehicle for furthering opportunities for activism. 
 Despite the size of the gatherings, Canal said she was grateful that the marches were uniformly peaceful and that no arrests had been reported. 
 "It was empowering and inspiring to see so many people, from different walks of life, put aside their differences and come together today," she said. The group plans to harness the success of the event to continue its anti-GMO cause. 
 "We will continue until Monsanto complies with consumer demand. They are poisoning our children, poisoning our planet," she said. "If we don't act, who's going to?" 
 Monsanto, based in St Louis, said on Saturday that it respects people's rights to express their opinions, but maintained that its seeds improve agriculture by helping farmers produce more from their land while conserving resources such as water and energy. 
 The US Food and Drug Administration does not require genetically modified foods to carry a label, but organic food companies and some consumer groups have intensified their push for labels, arguing that the modified seeds are floating from field to field and contaminating traditional crops. The groups have been bolstered by a growing network of consumers who are wary of processed and modified foods. 
 The Senate this week overwhelmingly rejected a bill that would allow states to require the labelling of genetically modified foods. 
 The Biotechnology Industry Organisation, a lobbying group that represents Monsanto, DuPont & Co and other makers of genetically modified seeds, has said that it supports voluntary labelling for people who seek out such products. But it says that mandatory labelling would only mislead or confuse consumers into thinking products weren't safe, even though the FDA has said there is no difference between GMO and organic, non-GMO foods. 
 However, state legislatures in Vermont and Connecticut moved ahead this month with votes to make food companies declare genetically modified ingredients on their packages. And supermarket retailer Whole Foods Markets Inc has said that all products in its North American stores containing genetically modified ingredients will be labeled as such by 2018. 
 Whole Foods says there is growing demand for products that don't use GMOs, with sales of products with a "Non-GMO" verification label spiking between 15% and 30%. 
 Monsanto is infamous throughout the world and Mexico is no exception. Here in corn’s birthplace, Monsanto is increasingly expanding its dominion of the food industry. This has created changes that have affected Mexicans’ diets, health, way of life, and ability to survive. 
 This bill, passed by Congress every 5 years,sets policies on food and agriculture in the United States and abroad. Congress is currently working on debating the amendments and details of the latest bill. One of the most controversial amendments is the King Amendment. 
 Passed on Wednesday, May 15th, in the US House Agriculture Committee, the King Amendment could take away states’ rights to label GMOs. Activists believe that the amendment is the result of lobbying efforts by Monsanto, the world leader on GMOs. 
 Currently twenty-six states – like California, Washington, Vermont, Maine and Connecticut – have GMO labeling bills or ballot initiatives in progress. Monsanto is threatening to sue the states that pass these bills and is taking action at the federal level – through the King Amendment – to stop these initiatives. The Senate has already voted down efforts to protect the states’ rights ability to enact their own labeling laws. 64 countries around the world already require the labeling of genetically modified foods, including all of the EU, Russia, China, Australia, South Africa, and Syria. 
 Furthermore, last year the “Monsanto Protection Act” granted the biotech industry with federal immunity when planting yet-to-be-approved genetically engineered (GE) crops. Under this act, the Secretary of Agriculture is required to grant a temporary permit for planting or cultivating a GE crop, even when a federal court has ordered that the planting be halted until an Environmental Impact Statement is completed. In an effort to repeal this Act, Senator Merkley has introduced Amendment #978 into the farm bill. 
 Monsanto and GMOs are very concerning topics in other countries as well. 
 In India, the use of Monsanto’s cottonseeds has resulted in tragedy. More than 100 Indian farmers committed suicide after finding themselves in extreme debt that resulted from buying Monsanto’s cottonseeds. Despite the promises of a higher yield and profit, the farmers ended up having crop yields 5 times lower than before and an income 7 times lower than before. 
 Mexico and GMO Corn 
 Mexicans are worried about the issue of GMO seeds, particularly genetically modified corn. It is believed that corn was first domesticated from wild grasses about 8,000 years ago in Oaxaca, Mexico. This fact is supported by the extraordinary diversity of corn in Mexico (hundreds of varieties) and the discovery of the Prehistoric Caves of Yagul and Mitla in the Central Valley of Oaxaca. In these caves scientists found evidence of the transition of nomadic hunter-gatherers into farmers. According to the UNESCO World Heritage Center: 
 “Ten thousand-year-old Cucurbitaceae seeds in one cave, Guilá Naquitz, are considered to be the earliest known evidence of domesticated plants in the continent, while corn cob fragments from the same cave are said to be the earliest documented evidence for the domestication of maize. The cultural landscape of the Prehistoric Caves of Yagul and Mitla demonstrates the link between man and nature that gave origin to the domestication of plants in North America, thus allowing the rise of Mesoamerican civilizations.” 
 GMO corn seeds represent a threat to the biodiversity of corn. According to the World Watch Institute: 
 A center of origin contains the early forms of a crop and its wild relatives. It is the gene bank the world depends on to improve and refresh a crop’s genetics. Mexico’s native corn varieties are a treasure chest of genes useful for breeding plants that can adjust to changing climate, agricultural, and nutritional needs. Scientists worry that if these plants become infected with GMOs, and if the artificial genes persist, they could dangerously contaminate, and possibly wipe out, the natural genetic basis of the world’s most important crops. Although they are manufactured, GMOs are living organisms, capable of reproduction. Once released, they are beyond human control. They are a new form of pollution, one that is difficult to detect and completely invisible. 
 Corn is also incredibly important for the people of Mexico. It is the principal staple food, and it stands as one of the country’s most central cultural symbols. It sustains indigenous people spiritually, physically, and economically. Corn was the basic food for the Maya and Aztec peoples, who worshiped it as a sacred plant since at least 5000 B.C. 
 On November 29, 2001, the scientific journal Nature published a story about the GMO contamination of traditional corn in Oaxaca, despite a 1998 moratorium on GMO crops by the Mexican government.Notwithstanding the negative effects of this contamination, the previous Mexican president, Felipe Calderón, allowed Monsanto, Dupont, and Dow to enter Mexico’s market by giving them the right to cultivate GMO corn in various northern Mexican states. Since then, GMOs have had a very strong presence in the country. 
 In order to “expose the aggressions against native corn and the people of corn,” different organizations gathered in Oaxaca for two days for the pre-trial hearing of the “Permanent People’s Tribunal” regarding “GMO contamination of Native Corn”. The event, which took place on April 26thand 27th, attracted hundreds of people who strategized on the best way to preserve native corn. (The “Permanent People’s Tribunal” is an international opinion tribunal that looks into human rights complaints, which can set precedence for future legal actions.) 
 Organizations and farm workers gave testimony about the effects of GMOs in their communities. Central themes were the Mexican government’s encouragement of GMO planting, the deterioration of state support to farmers, the threat to the biological diversity of corn, the contamination of non-GMO crops, the importance of corn to the identity and culture of Mexicans, and the corruption of the scientists who are hired by agro-businesses. Click here to read the judges’ final opinion regarding these issues. 
 Resistance to and concern about GMOs is a worldwide struggle. The implications of GMO consumption are still not clear. Contamination by GMO plants is persistent in many areas throughout the planet. The survival of small-scale farmers and indigenous people who have handpicked the best seeds from their crops for centuries is at stake (as GMO crops produce infertile seeds). 
 This Friday, more than 400 protests against Monsanto and GMOs will be taking place in 49 countries. As people who fight for justice, we have the responsibility to think about how these issues affect us locally and about impacts of U.S. corporations like Monsanto across the world. 
 FARM POWER: A farmer protests against Monsanto in New Delhi in August 2013. The dispute in India with the cotton seed multinational has disrupted the country's $1.8 billion-a-year seed industry. REUTERS/Adnan Abidi 
 Cotton Crunch 
 Seed giant Monsanto meets its match as Hindu nationalists assert power in Modi's India 
 A little-known cotton seed company has taken on Monsanto, with the aid of a right-wing Hindu group that helped propel the Indian prime minister to power. The dispute threatens to upend the world's largest cotton-producing market. 
 NEW DELHI – Tens of millions of dollars were within reach for M. Prabhakara Rao as he prepared in April 2015 to take his Indian cotton seed company public. 
 The Indian businessman already had $54 million in initial funding from an American private equity investor. Rao had also locked in a long-term licensing agreement with Monsanto Co, the world’s largest seed company, for the technology used in genetically modified cotton seeds that made up the majority of his annual sales. 
 Two months after publishing his initial public offering plan, Rao gambled. He sent one of his executives to negotiate a 10 percent cut in royalties with Monsanto. The multinational said no. 
 The outcome of that meeting ignited a corporate battle that has left Rao’s IPO plans in tatters and drawn in the Indian and U.S. governments. More ominously, the fight has disrupted India’s $1.8 billion-a-year seed industry, with Monsanto saying it may abandon the market. 
 Monsanto’s Indian joint venture last July withdrew its application to introduce a new generation of cotton seed technology to India. The existing version, in India for a decade, is losing effectiveness against bollworms, which can wipe out crops. If another company doesn’t step into the breach, agricultural economists warn the dispute could damage India’s cotton-growing sector - which recently surpassed China’s as the world’s biggest and last year accounted for more than a quarter of global output, with a value of over $8.5 billion. 
 To an outsider, Rao’s decision to take on Monsanto in a David-and-Goliath battle may seem hard to fathom. But the rules of doing business in India have changed. With the rise to power of Prime Minister Narendra Modi in 2014 on a groundswell of Hindu nationalism, newly assertive right-wing groups, suspicious of foreign influence and particularly outspoken against large multinationals like Monsanto, now hold sway in the government. 
 The leaders of these groups operate under the umbrella of the powerful Hindu nationalist group known as the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, or RSS, Hindi for “national volunteer organization.” They speak of returning India to an ancient, Hindu glory that was ravaged by foreign imperial powers. More pragmatically, they’re amassing power. 
 Modi himself first attended RSS meetings at the age of 8 and was propelled to power with the group’s help. A series of crucial ministries, including agriculture, are now run by ministers who are members of the RSS and its affiliates. Members of these Hindu nationalist groups also form a network of influential mandarins who seldom surface in public. They have the ear of the prime minister and those around him. 
 A lean, moustachioed man, Rao denies seeking the support of the RSS or working in tandem with the group, which wants indigenous varieties of cotton seed to replace Monsanto’s products. But RSS powerbrokers - including the agriculture minister himself - told Reuters that Rao approached them for help in his battle with Monsanto. And they say they were happy to weigh in. 
 The agriculture minister, longtime RSS member Radha Mohan Singh, says his decision to intervene in the dispute was driven by the need to serve the interests of all Indian farmers, not just Rao. 
 “It is important for all of us to unite to wage a war against Monsanto.” 
 The timing of Singh’s actions, though, was telling. In the months after the meeting between Monsanto and Rao’s man in Mumbai, the agriculture ministry first challenged and then slashed the royalties Monsanto is able to charge in India. The ministry called for an antitrust investigation into alleged monopolistic practices by the company. It also floated the idea of a compulsory licensing regime that would all but force Monsanto and other firms to hand over their proprietary technology to major Indian seed companies that applied for licenses. 
 Prime Minister Modi hasn’t publicly commented on the matter. After the U.S. ambassador intervened last year, according to two people familiar with the dispute, the Indian government suspended the compulsory licensing proposal. The other measures remain in place. 
 After years of seeking more leverage with Monsanto, Rao found in the rise of Modi and the RSS an opportunity to challenge the company’s domination of the Indian market. It was against this backdrop that he dispatched senior company executive P. Sateesh Kumar, a Ph.D. in agricultural genetics, to Monsanto’s Mumbai headquarters in 2015. 
 At the time, Rao’s company, Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd, was behind on royalty payments to Monsanto and on its way to racking up, by Monsanto’s calculations, more than $20 million in debt. And its American investor, Blackstone Group LP, was waiting for the IPO to go through. Nonetheless, Kumar sat down in a corner conference room on the fifth floor and conveyed Rao’s demand for a reduction in royalties. Monsanto delivered its answer there and then: That wasn’t going to happen. 
 RSS rising 
 Reuters graphic 
 1. Founded in 1925 as an anti-colonial group, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) is a Hindu nationalist, cultural organization. 
 2. Wants to restore India to its past glory, which the group says ended after it was invaded by Muslims and then Christians beginning in the 8th century. 
 3. The ideological parent of the country’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the RSS counts among its members Prime Minister Narendra Modi; the president of the BJP; and the ministers in charge of agriculture, highways and internal security. 
 4. Has dozens of affiliated organizations, including a farmers’ union with about 2 million members that is seeking a ban on seeds manufactured by foreign companies such as Monsanto. 
 5. Umbrella body for a range of right-wing Hindu groups that have pushed against multinationals and spearheaded, among other things, sometimes violent opposition to the slaughter of cows, which are sacred in Hinduism. 
 6. Volunteers meet at local shakhas, or branches, which numbered 63,000 in 2016, up from 42,000 in 2010. 
 7.  Has been banned four times, once after a former RSS member assassinated Mahatma Gandhi in 1948; ban was later lifted in the absence of evidence the group planned the attack. 
 Sources: RSS; Reuters reporting 
 Before Kumar left the meeting on that hot June day, he paused. He told the executives from Monsanto and its Indian joint venture that there would be “consequences” for refusing Rao a discount, according to a letter Monsanto sent to the government and which was reviewed by Reuters. Kumar says he did not use such language. 
 In an interview in which he let loose peals of laughter, Rao pointed out that the first item under “Risk Factors” in the IPO prospectus for his company, of which he controls more than 80 percent of shares, was the possibility of his contract with Monsanto being disrupted. Still, he said, Monsanto made a mistake in thinking it had the upper hand. 
 Monsanto declined to answer questions on the role of the RSS in Rao’s campaign. “We conduct our business in an honest, transparent and respectful manner and continue to engage with stakeholders across the spectrum,” the company said. 
 Monsanto is backed in the dispute by chemical giant Bayer AG, which is in the process of buying the seed company for $66 billion. It also has the support of the local units of other seed heavyweights, including Dow Chemical Co and Syngenta AG. In August, these multinationals held a news conference in which they called for transparency in government regulation and licensing. Failure to do so, they warned, would endanger future investment in India. 
 An RSS spokesman referred queries about Rao and Monsanto to the RSS farmers’ union, the Bharatiya Kisan Sangh. Its vice president, a man named Prabhakar Kelkar, said the union was working with Rao, who had approached it to complain about Monsanto’s seed pricing. 
 “It is important for all of us to unite to wage a war against Monsanto. No one can do it alone, be it Rao or the” farmers’ union, Kelkar told Reuters. “We are cooperating with him because he is fighting a battle that is meant for greater good.” 
 Monsanto and Rao are now locked in a series of government complaints, litigation and arbitration. 
 Citing an Indian law that excludes seeds from being patented, Rao says Monsanto should never have been allowed to collect royalties after an initial payment to use its technology. Or, at the very least, he adds, prices should have been set by the government. 
 The technology currently licensed out by Monsanto is known as Bollgard II. The company received a patent in 2009 in India for Bollgard II’s ability to modify cotton seeds to include a microbe called Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt), which fortifies cotton plants against bollworms. 
 Monsanto says Rao and a small group of other seed companies demanding a reduction in royalties are simply trying to renege on contracts and money owed. Dhiraj Pant, who oversees tech development for Monsanto across Asia, said it would have been preferable if the Indian seed companies had not pushed for the government to step in. "It is unfortunate that these disputing companies sought policy interventions to address a bilateral matter," said Pant. 
 The RSS, which has its own farmer and labor unions, was formed in 1925 to campaign against British colonial rule. It seeks to instill a nationalist vision of India as a Hindu nation, despite large minority populations that include Muslims and Christians. 
 The group nurtured Modi’s rise – in his early days in the RSS he cleaned floors at a local chapter office. And the RSS helped form the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). 
 But Modi and his RSS backers have differing views about the role of foreign multinationals. In his 13 years as chief minister of the western state of Gujarat, Modi was an early supporter of genetically modified cotton. His administration there allowed farmers to plant Monsanto-modified seeds, known as Bt cotton, before the technology received official approval in New Delhi. 
 His approach contradicted the RSS stance against multinationals operating in the agricultural sector, particularly when it comes to genetically modified crops. 
 The tension simmered for years. After Modi’s election in 2014, the RSS began its push. 
 A senior leader in the RSS farmers’ union, a man named Mohini Mohan Mishra, began holding study sessions with leaders in the ruling party and the Modi administration to argue against genetically modified crops. One of Mishra’s presentation slides pointed to the rise in popularity of organic food in the West. 
 Another slide said of Monsanto: “It created seed monopoly, a threat to seed sovereignty.” 
 Monsanto’s mistake was that it did not approach the RSS to plead its case, said Mishra in an interview at his office in central Delhi, which has peeling paint, dirty rugs and, in summer months, mosquitoes buzzing inside. 
 “It was the overconfidence of Monsanto that has destroyed their chances to do business in India,” said Mishra. “They failed to study and understand the RSS.” 
 Rao, meanwhile, was lobbying Modi’s government. Sometime in 2015, he met with Singh, the agriculture minister and RSS member. 
 The powerbrokers and officials of the Congress party that ruled India for most of its independent history tended to espouse secular ideology in clipped English accents that hinted at elite schooling at home and abroad. The RSS leadership speaks of rural roots and the virtues of the homegrown. 
 Singh is cut from that cloth. At the beginning of one interview he paused to fold a small wad of snuff in his left cheek as an attendant brought a metal spittoon. 
 He was not hard to convince that Monsanto was in the wrong, said Rao. 
 “The truth is that Monsanto was dominating the market, and that is not good for India’s farming practices,” said Singh. “We should have our own seeds to compete with them.” 
 After Monsanto declared Rao’s company in breach of payment obligations and terminated its contract in November 2015, Singh’s agriculture ministry moved swiftly. 
 The next month, the ministry established a panel to fix the price of genetically modified cotton seeds and the royalties Monsanto was allowed to collect. 
 Less than two weeks later, a junior minister under Singh’s command told parliament that the ministry had asked India’s antitrust regulator to consider investigating whether Monsanto abused its dominance in the marketplace. He said the National Seed Association of India, of which Rao is the president, had asked his ministry to intervene in the dispute. An antitrust investigation was formally launched in February last year. 
 On March 4, 2016, Monsanto’s chief executive for India put out a statement threatening to leave the country. Four days later, Singh’s ministry slashed the royalty paid by local firms to sellers of genetically modified cotton seed technology, a market dominated by Monsanto, by about 70 percent. 
 Two months later, the agriculture ministry proposed compulsory licensing for Monsanto’s technology. It was this move that prompted the U.S. ambassador to India at the time, Richard Verma, to approach Modi’s office. People familiar with the matter said Verma wrote to Modi’s principal secretary, Nripendra Misra, after the agriculture ministry did not respond to two previous letters. After the ambassador and Misra met, the government suspended the licensing measure. 
 During a visit to India last year, the U.S. commerce secretary, Penny Pritzker, said she had raised the Monsanto dispute with the government. “Companies will look to see how this is resolved because it sends a message about the seriousness of the current government to protect intellectual property,” said Pritzker, who stepped down this January. 
 An aide close to Modi declined to discuss whether the prime minister had personally intervened in the licensing dispute. He said the issue would “remain open” for the foreseeable future. “Sometimes the best decision is not to take a decision,” the aide said. The prime minister’s office did not answer questions from Reuters. 
 Asked about Rao and his fight with Monsanto, Singh denied granting the businessman any favors. 
 Kelkar, from the RSS farmers’ union, said the RSS had pushed for Singh to act against Monsanto. “In the previous regime we had to stand on the streets to launch anti-Monsanto protests,” Kelkar said. “But with this government we can sit and talk in a room – it’s because we all believe in the same agenda.” 
 The impact of the dispute on Monsanto’s bottom line became clear late last year when the company released its results: Sales of seeds and genetic traits for cotton dropped 16 percent, or $83 million, in the fiscal year ending August. That was “primarily due to lower average net selling price in India as a result of new government pricing policies,” the report said. 
 The dispute’s fallout could have grave implications, says Ashok Gulati, an agricultural economist who has advised the government on crop support prices in the past. 
 “The whole fiasco will dissuade global seed or technology companies from investing in India,” Gulati said. In the short term, he said, India might get by with a local alternative to genetically modified cotton. “But in the long-term, say beyond five years or so, we need a technology that can propel India’s cotton output. But then, political masters don’t look beyond immediate gains.” 
 Rao says that Monsanto and others deserve a return on their investment. But he wants royalty rates to be determined by government rules. In an interview, he pointed to the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act, which gives the regulator the power to fix royalty rates. The government fails, however, to exercise that authority, enabling Monsanto to dictate terms, says Rao. 
 In October, the government announced a change in the board that oversees the plant varieties act. A new member had been added: M. Prabhakara Rao. 
 Additional reporting by Douglas Busvine in New Delhi. 
 Timeline: How Monsanto got outplayed 
 The fight led by M. Prabhakara Rao, the head of Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd, against global seed giant Monsanto Co erupted in 2015. What at first looked like a David-and-Goliath showdown – Monsanto’s $15 billion of sales that year were roughly 80 times that of the firm headquartered in the south India city of Hyderabad – quickly became an example of how the rules of doing business have changed under Prime Minister Narendra Modi. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 APRIL 2015 – Rao is poised to make tens of millions of dollars by taking his company public. In a prospectus for taking  Nuziveedu Seeds public, the first item under risk factors is the possibility that his company could lose its agreements with Monsanto, brokered through its local joint venture. But there was something that wasn’t spelled out in the prospectus: India’s newly powerful right-wing factions, under the organizational umbrella of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), or “national volunteer organization,” are suspicious of foreign influence and voice particular disdain for large international corporations. Like Monsanto. That gives Rao an opening. Even with the risk to his IPO, Rao makes a decision: He is going to take on Monsanto. 
 JUNE 2015 – Only about three months after renewing his contract, Rao chooses to push his demand for a 10 percent cut in royalties he pays for Monsanto’s technology. Monsanto representatives tell one of his executives at a meeting in Mumbai that the answer is no. According to a subsequent letter sent to India’s agriculture ministry by Monsanto’s joint venture, the executive threatened there would be “consequences” for that decision. 
 JULY 2015 – A group of nine seed companies, including Nuziveedu, writes to Monsanto’s joint venture in India saying they want to renegotiate the fees they pay. Their reasoning: some state courts have set the amounts that can be charged for seeds. The companies, in turn, want to reduce the fees they pay Monsanto. 
 In August, the National Seed Association of India, an organization of which Rao is the president, writes to the director of Monsanto’s joint venture in India and makes a similar argument. The director responds that such contracts are bilateral and that they should approach Monsanto directly. Among those he cc’s: Rao. 
 NOVEMBER 2015 – As tensions increase, Monsanto’s joint venture in India sends a notice to Rao’s company that it is terminating their agreement. At the time, Monsanto says, Nuziveedu owes almost 1.4 billion rupees, or more than $20 million. 
 DECEMBER 2015 – With the relationship between Rao and Monsanto unraveling, India’s agriculture ministry, headed by a lifelong RSS member, steps into the fray. The first big move is an announcement of a cotton seed price regime. 
 DECEMBER 2015 – The agriculture ministry then informs India’s upper house of parliament that “allegations of monopolistic practices” by Monsanto’s joint venture in India have been referred for investigation to the Competition Commission of India. 
 MARCH 2016 – With its setbacks mounting, in particular government recommendations to reduce the amount paid for its seed technology, Monsanto says it will have to “reevaluate every aspect of our position in India.” 
 MARCH 2016 – India’s junior agriculture minister at the time Sanjeev Balyan tells Reuters that Monsanto is free to leave India: “We're not scared if Monsanto leaves the country.” 
 MAY 2016 – The Indian government passes a measure that will essentially force firms like Monsanto to hand over genetically modified crop technology to any qualified Indian firm that applies for it. After lobbying by the U.S. ambassador to India, the measure is frozen. 
 Late 2016 – The costs of the battle have shown up in Monsanto’s bottom line. In its 2016 annual report, the company says its sales of seeds and genetic traits for cotton have dropped by 16 percent, or $83 million, in the fiscal year ending August. 
 ————— 
 By Mayank Bhardwaj, Rupam Jain and Tom Lasseter 
 Photo editing: Altaf Bhat 
 Graphics: Jin Wu 
 Design: Catherine Tai 
 Edited by Peter Hirschberg and Paritosh Bansal 
 Follow Reuters Investigates 
 Other Reuters investigations and long-form narratives 
 On March 26, President Obama signed H.R. 933 with a provision called the Monsanto Protection Act. Monsanto is a large agricultural corporation focused on providing genetically modified seeds to farmers and agribusinesses. They have created revenue by applying biotechnology techniques to the farming industry that include modifying DNA of seeds such as the “terminator seed” which will produce plants that will never yield fertile seeds. Monsanto has also created seeds that could endure pesticides and herbicides. 
 Food justice activists are furious with the backdoor signing of the Monsanto Protection Act for a number of reasons. The act would protect Monsanto from being sued for health damages caused by the use of their genetically modified crops. Additionally, if health damages were discovered by the use of GMO foods, then the United States government would not be able to ban them from consumption. 
 What these complaints do not address, however, is the fact that Monsanto's practices with GMO seeds can do more than just hurt the public health; they can also destroy traditional farming methods in communities around the world. 
 Apparently, the large corporation has been able to disingenuously protect its malpractices by taking advantage of its multi-million dollar business of destroying cultural farming practices all over the world. 
 Monsanto created the genetically modified organism (GMO) seeds in order to monopolize the seed industry across the world and thus create more revenue. Technically, GMO is simply the result of a lab process that takes genes from one species and inserts them into another to obtain a certain characteristic of the seed. But what kind of projects have these profits been funding? 
 One way they have been able to monopolize the seed industry is by cutting a deal with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). When countries are in debt, they can ask the IMF for loans to rejuvenate the economy. Some of the conditions of the IMF loan include sustainable practices the country must implement in order to revitalize the economy with western capitalistic development. However, one of the conditions of the IMF includes preferential access to markets by agricultural conglomerates such as Monsanto. Countries impacted by Monsanto include India, Mexico, Liberia and Paraguay. 
 This is an issue because farmers are not informed about the changed seed and suffer from inadequate water supply and expensive irrigation methods required. Instructions for the GMO seeds given to non-English speaking farmers across the world are of course printed in English. The seeds are also 10 times more expensive than natural seeds and can force farmers to take loans from local banks. Moreover, farmers are required to continuously buy the expensive seeds, as those provided by the conglomerate are infertile. 
 Even if the farmers required to use GMO seeds were given adequate instruction and could afford to purchase the expensive irrigation techniques required to grow the GMO seeds, this could be considered a form of cultural genocide. For thousands of years, communities in places like Mexico and India have been farming without the use of technologically modified seeds that require special instructions. They have prospered well without the monopolization of cotton, corn and rice. Monsanto is actively participating in an attempt to eliminate other countries' inherited and culturally sound practices of growing seed and producing food. 
 President Obama likely did not think about the cultural impact of protecting Monsanto in its use of genetically modified seeds. Nor did he likely think about the amount of power he gave to Monsanto when signing the Monsanto Protection Act. 
 The IMF, the United States and Monsanto should come up with a way to use science and sustainability practices to ensure the health of all peoples, the earth and our individual cultures, rather than profit from greed and destruction. 
 In an effort to protect the natural integrity of seeds, to protect the freedom to save seeds, and to help preserve the ability to be able to plant seeds from season-to-season that will re-germinate in accordance with the sustainable cycles of nature, the Seed Freedom movement has planned two weeks of advocacy and awareness-raising activities.  From October 2-16, the world is being asked to take a stand against the efforts of corporate agriculture who have increasingly worked to undermine seed freedom.  The production of hybrid seeds very often creates sterile varieties of crops that farmers are unable to save and replant, forcing them into economic dependence on seed companies for the annual re-purchasing of seed stock.  Now, corporate agriculture has taken this even one step further with companies such as Monsanto genetically engineering seeds that self-destruct (terminator technology) in each successive season, therefore ensuring the farmer’s dependency upon these companies. 
 Never Ending Food has signed on to the ‘Declaration of Seed Freedom’ which was created by Dr. Vandana Shiva, the  internationally recognized advocate for sustainable farming (and common sense) practices throughout the world.  Seed Freedom has also issued a Seed Saving Kit for people who want more information on what is happening to the world’s seed supplies and what they can do to help.  Here is the PDF version of this kit:  Seed-Kit 
 The following is the “Declaration on Seed Freedom” by Dr. Vandana Shiva that Never Ending Food has committed to and that we would encourage all of you all to support as well.  This is a great opportunity to get involved with the activities of the Seed Freedom movement and to help to ensure that sustainable and natural systems are preserved to meet the needs of humanity long into the future: 
 Seed is the source of life, it is the self urge of life to express itself, to renew itself, to multiply, to evolve in perpetuity in freedom. 
 Seed is the embodiment of bio cultural diversity. It contains millions of years of biological and cultural evolution of the past, and the potential of millennia of a future unfolding. 
 Seed Freedom is the birth right of every form of life and is the basis for the protection of biodiversity. Seed Freedom is the birth right of every farmer and food producer. Farmers rights to save, exchange, evolve, breed, sell seed is at the heart of Seed Freedom. When this freedom is taken away farmers get trapped in debt and in extreme cases commit suicide. 
 Seed Freedom is the basis of Food Freedom, since seed is the first link in the food chain. Seed Freedom is threatened by patents on seed, which create seed monopolies and make it illegal for farmers to save and exchange seed. Patents on seed are ethically and ecologically unjustified because patents are exclusive rights granted for an invention. Seed is not an invention. Life is not an invention. 
 Seed Freedom of diverse cultures is threatened by Biopiracy and the patenting of indigenous knowledge and biodiversity. Biopiracy is not innovation – it is theft. Seed Freedom is threatened by genetically engineered seeds, which are contaminating our farms, thus closing the option for GMO-free food for all. 
 Seed Freedom of farmers is threatened when after contaminating our crops, corporations sue farmer for “stealing their property”. 
 Seed Freedom is threatened by the deliberate transformation of the seed from a renewable self generative resource to a non renewable patented commodity. The most extreme case of non renewable seed is the “Terminator Technology” developed with aim to create sterile seed. 
 We commit ourselves to defending seed freedom as the freedom of diverse species to evolve; as the freedom of human communities to reclaim open source seed as a commons. 
 To this end, we will save seed, we will create community seed banks and seed libraries, we will not recognize any law that illegitimately makes seed the private property of corporations. and we will stop the patents on seed. 
 Javascript is disabled on your browser. To view this site, you must enable JavaScript or upgrade to a JavaScript-capable browser. 
 Seeds labeled GMO—the acronym for “genetically modified organism”—result from one of the industry’s most controversial practices. GMO seeds are bred not in a garden but in a laboratory using modern biotechnology techniques like gene splicing. Scientists modify a seed’s DNA to ensure the resulting plant produces desired characteristics. Seed Savers Exchange does not produce or sell GMO seeds. 
 Non-GMO seeds are cultivated through pollination. They can be bred two different ways: as hybrid seeds or as open-pollinated seeds. The term “hybrid” refers to a plant variety developed through a specific, carefully controlled cross-pollination of two different parent plants to produce new traits that can’t be created by inbreeding two of the same plants. Hybrid varieties—also called F1 or “first-filial” hybrids—produce seeds that are not “true to type,” meaning that they do not conform to the known characteristics of a given plant variety. 
 Open-pollinated seeds, by contrast, are produced from random pollination by wind, birds, insects, or other natural means. Gardeners who save seeds from open-pollinated plants can keep them genetically pure by isolating the plants from the pollen of other plants. They then save seeds from those plants to grow out the following season, confident that the seeds will possess the same characteristics as the parent plant, or grow “true to type.” Seed Savers Exchange both saves and sells open-pollinated seeds, many of which are heirloom seeds that have been passed down through many generations. 
 For Mexicans, maize is not a crop but a deep cultural symbol intrinsic to daily life. Corn was domesticated from a grass called teocintle by the peoples of Meso-America approximately 10,000 years ago. Often referred to as humanity’s greatest agronomic achievement, maize is now grown all over the world. The yellow corn commonly found in the United States pales in comparison to the shapes, sizes, and colors of the traditional maize varieties cultivated by the indigenous peoples of Mexico. The ears of corn may range from a couple of inches to a foot long, in colors that include white, red, yellow, blue, and black. Some varieties even have an assortment of colors on one ear. 
 Corn is inextricably tied to the quotidian lives of the peasants and indigenous peoples of Mexico. As the basic grain, it shapes daily meals, and it’s growing cycle influences the timing of festivals. The image and shape of maize is a ubiquitous component of architecture and crafts. Spiritually, physically, and economically, corn sustains indigenous peoples. In the words of one Indian woman, “Corn is so important because it allows us to live at peace. It’s our form of food security.” Corn is linked to survival: During rough economic times or in the face of natural disasters, families will produce more maize to feed themselves. A Tzotzil Maya elder recounts, “During the past five centuries, while our people have withstood suffering—enormous sufferings—our corn has allowed us to survive.” 
 Now the North American Free Trade Agreement threatens to change that history. NAFTA has allowed the Mexican market to be flooded with imported corn from the United States, the vast majority of which is genetically modified. Before NAFTA, more than a third of the corn produced by rural farmers was retained for consumption at home, and the rest was sold on local markets. Indigenous peoples and peasants were practicing true food sovereignty and protected themselves from natural disasters and price fluctuations. Most local maize is sold through DISCONSA, a network of rural food stores common in poor and remote regions. As multinationals entered the market, a few began to sell their corn through the DISCONSA network, a practice that artificially lowered prices, hurt local farmers’ income, and disrupted the usual pattern of retaining enough corn for contingencies. More importantly, some of the corn flowing into the network consisted of genetically modified organisms. Estimates of contamination vary according to locality, from 3 percent to 60 percent. Within the DISCONSA network, the Mexican government found 37 percent contamination. 
 “We have learned that agrochemical companies patented our maize,” said a Tzotzil statement published in 2002 in La Jornada. “They are putting in genes from other living beings and many chemicals to completely put an end to our natural maize, so we’ll have to buy nothing but transgenic maize. If these agrochemical companies try to do away with our maize, it will be like putting an end to part of the culture that our Mayan ancestors bequeathed to us. Our indigenous peasant grandparents gave their labor and their hearts; they cried as they asked protection from our Creator for their work to bear fruit.” 
 To address the threat to traditional corn, the Tzotzil people formed the Mother Seeds in Resistance project. Mother Seeds is based in an autonomous indigenous school in the Chiapas highlands. There the community is identifying seeds to be preserved and preparing them to be frozen (for preservation, the moisture content in the seeds must be below 6 percent; otherwise the water inside the seeds will freeze and then burst the cell membranes, destroying them). 
 Community members of all ages are involved in the identification process, and it has become a channel through which young are learning from their elders. “It’s good to talk about these things in Tzotzil,” said two teachers, “because it is our own language.” Aldo Gonzalez, an indigenous Zapotec who has been on the forefront of the campaign against genetically modified maize, says, “Native seeds are a very important part of our culture. The pyramids may have been destroyed, but a handful of maize seed is the legacy we can leave to our children and grandchildren.” 
 Christina Santini recently worked at the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and currently works in urban planning and development at Harvard University. She is also a professional cook. 
Seeds of doubt
North American
farmers’ experiences
of GM crops

2 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Contents

01. Preface 3
01. Executive summary
01. Introduction
02. Context
03. Yield

4

7

9

11

04. Agrochemical use
4.1 Herbicides 15
4.2 Pesticides 17
05. Farmer income

15

19

06. Herbicide resistant volunteers

21

07. Contamination 25
7.1 Seed contamination 25
7.2 Crop contamination 27
7.3 Commodity and food contamination
08. Unpredicted effects
09. Farmer choice

33

35

39

10. National farm economy
10.1 International trade 43
10.2 Subsidies 43
11. Legal issues 47
11.1 Patent infringement
11.2 Compensation 52
11.3 Liability 53
11.4 Legal bans 55
11.5 Legislation 55

43

47

12. Discussion 57
12.1 Results 57
12.2 Why are farmers growing GM crops? 58
12.3 HT crops and the biotechnology companies
12.4 What the biotechnology companies say 59
12.5 The political situation in the UK 60
13. Conclusions

61

01. Appendices 62
01. A1 Glossary 62
01. A2 References 63
01. Acknowledgements

67

59

SEEDS OF DOUBT 3

Preface

Perhaps the greatest achievement of
the biotechnology industry has been in
creating a myth and then transforming it
into a political orthodoxy. It has managed
to persuade some of the world’s most
powerful governments that the ‘white
heat of biotechnology’ can bring benefits
of higher yields, lower chemical use, food
security and, critically, profitability for
farmers.
Those who have signed up seem enthralled
by the apparent potential of genetic
engineering to improve on nature. Yet,
despite growing public alarm (generally
dismissed as irrational fears born of scare
mongering) the accuracy of these claims
has not, until now, been put under the
microscope.
In undertaking this study of the actual
impact of the commercialisation of GM
crops in North America, the Soil Association
has gathered sufficient evidence to challenge
the fundamental proposition that GM
technology represents progress.
The evidence we set out suggests that,
in reality, virtually every benefit claimed
for GM crops has not occurred. Instead,
farmers are reporting lower yields,
continuing dependency on herbicides and
pesticides, loss of access to markets and,
critically, reduced profitability leaving food
production even more vulnerable to the
interests of the biotechnology companies
and in need of subsidies.
The report makes disturbing reading, but
at a time when a decision has to be made in
the national interest about the commercial
introduction of GM crops, we hope it will
result in a better informed public debate –
and a more independent, less pressurised
decision.

Patrick Holden
Director, Soil Association

4 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Executive summary

The UK government and farming
community will soon make a fundamental
and long-term decision: whether to allow
genetically modified (GM) crops to be
commercially grown in the UK. The
picture the biotechnology industry has
painted of GM crops in North America is
one of unqualified success, after six years
of commercial growing. The objective of
this report was to assess whether this image
is accurate and if not what problems have
occurred. We present interviews with North
American farmers about their experiences
of GM soya, maize and oilseed rape, and
review some of the independent research.
The evidence we have gathered
demonstrates that GM food crops are
far from a success story. In complete
contrast to the impression given by the
biotechnology industry, it is clear that
they have not realised most of the claimed
benefits and have been a practical and
economic disaster. Widespread GM
contamination has severely disrupted
GM-free production including organic
farming, destroyed trade and undermined
the competitiveness of North American
agriculture overall. GM crops have also
increased the reliance of farmers on
herbicides and led to many legal problems.
Six years after the first commercial
growing of GM crops, the use of genetic
engineering in global agriculture is still
limited. Only four countries including
the US and Canada grow 99 per cent of
the GM crops grown worldwide, and just
four crops account for 99 per cent of the
global area planted to GM crops. In the
UK, we have a choice over whether to
remain GM-free.
Our findings show that GM crops would
obstruct the government from meeting its
policy objective that farming should become
more competitive and meet consumer
requirements. It would also prevent it from
honouring its public commitment to ensure
that the expansion of organic farming is
not undermined by the introduction of
GM crops. The Soil Association believes
this report will contribute towards a more
balanced and realistic debate on the likely
impacts of GM crops on farming in the
UK and assist an informed decision on
the commercialisation of GM crops.

Farming impacts

The direct impacts of GM crops on farmers
in North America are examined in chapters
3–6, 8 and 9. Many of the claimed benefits
have not been seen in practice and several
unforeseen problems have emerged:
• The profitability of growing GM herbicide
tolerant soya and insect resistant Bt maize
is less than non-GM crops, due to the extra
cost of GM seed and because lower market
prices are paid for GM crops
• The claims of increased yields have not
been realised overall except for a small
increase in Bt maize yields. Moreover, the
main GM variety (Roundup Ready soya)
yields 6 –11 per cent less than non-GM
varieties
• GM herbicide tolerant crops have
made farmers more reliant on herbicides
and new weed problems have emerged.
Farmers are applying herbicides several
times, contrary to the claim that only
one application would be needed. Rogue
GM oilseed rape plants (‘volunteers’)
have become a widespread problem
in Canada
• Farmers have suffered a severe reduction
in choice about how they farm as a result
of the introduction of GM crops. Some
are finding themselves locked into
growing GM crops.

Contamination

In chapter 7 we look at GM contamination,
which has been the single greatest problem.
Widespread GM contamination has occurred
rapidly and caused major disruption at all
levels of the agricultural industry, for seed
resources, crop production, food processing
and bulk commodity trading. It has
undermined the viability of the whole
North American farming industry:
• Contamination has caused the loss of
nearly the whole organic oilseed rape
sector in the province of Saskatchewan,
at a potential cost of millions of dollars.
Organic farmers are struggling practically
and economically; many have been unable
to sell their produce as organic due to
contamination

SEEDS OF DOUBT 5

• All non-GM farmers are finding it very
hard or impossible to grow GM-free crops.
Seeds have become almost completely
contaminated with GMOs, good non-GM
varieties have become hard to buy, and
there is a high risk of crop contamination
• Because of the lack of segregation, the
whole food processing and distribution
system has become vulnerable to costly
and disruptive contamination incidents.
In September 2000, just one per cent
of unapproved GM maize contaminated
almost half the national maize supply
and cost the company, Aventis, up to
$1 billion.

• One of the most unpleasant outcomes of
the introduction of GM crops has been the
accusations of farmers infringing company
patent rights. A non-GM farmer whose
crop was contaminated by GMOs was
sued by Monsanto for $400,000
• While biotechnology companies are suing
farmers, farmers themselves are turning
to the courts for compensation from the
companies for lost income and markets
as a result of contamination. In Canada,
a class action has been launched on
behalf of the whole organic sector in
Saskatchewan for the loss of the organic
rape market.

Economic impacts

Farmers’ response

The economic impact of GM crops is the
focus of chapter 10. GM crops have been
an economic disaster. As well as the lower
farm profitability, GM crops have been a
market failure internationally. Because of
the lack of segregation, they have caused
the collapse of entire exports to Europe
and a loss of trade with Asia:

The severe market problems have led
many North American farmers to seriously
question the further development of GM
crops (chapters 10 and 11):

• Within a few years of the introduction of
GM crops, almost the entire $300 million
annual US maize exports to the EU and
the $300 million annual Canadian rape
exports to the EU had disappeared, and
the US share of the world soya market
had decreased
• US farm subsidies were meant to have
fallen over the last few years. Instead
they rose dramatically, paralleling the
growth in the area of GM crops. The lost
export trade as a result of GM crops is
thought to have caused a fall in farm
prices and hence a need for increased
government subsidies, estimated at an
extra $3 – $5 billion annually
• In total GM crops may have cost the US
economy at least $12 billion net from
1999 to 2001.

Legal issues

GM contamination has led to a proliferation
of lawsuits and the emergence of complex
legal issues (chapter 11):

• Many US farm organisations have been
urging farmers to plant non-GM crops
this year
• The US and Canadian National Farmers
Unions, American Corn Growers
Association, Canadian Wheat Board,
organic farming groups and more than
200 other groups are lobbying for a ban
or moratorium on the introduction of
the next major proposed GM food crop,
GM wheat
• With the support of several farming
organisations, federal legislation was
tabled in Congress in May 2002, to
introduce GM labelling and liability
rules in the US.

6 SEEDS OF DOUBT

SEEDS OF DOUBT 7

1

Introduction

The government and UK farming
community will soon be taking a decision
of fundamental and long-term importance
for UK agriculture: whether or not to
allow genetically modified (GM) crops
to be grown commercially in this country.
Currently the UK is among the vast majority
of countries in the world where there is
no commercial growing of GM crops, and
also no market demand. However, this
de facto moratorium is set to end with the
completion of the government’s programme
of farm GM trials next spring and following
a proposed public debate. Were GM crops
to be given the green light and there to be
a market, commercial planting could begin
as early as autumn 2003.
In September 2001, the Agriculture and
Environment Biotechnology Commission
(AEBC), the government’s independent
advisory body on biotechnology and
agriculture, published its report, Crops
on Trial. This said that the GM trials
programme alone would not provide
enough information for the government
to allow commercial growing of GM crops
and a decision should only be taken after
an independent review of the evidence
from those countries where GM crops are
already commercially grown. The AEBC
also proposed that there should be a
broader public debate on GM crops.
The Soil Association welcomed this
announcement and trusts this report will
be a helpful contribution to this debate.
This report reveals the experiences North
American farmers have had of growing GM
crops and the impacts these crops have had
on their industry. Four GM crops have been
grown commercially on a large scale for
the last six years in the US and Canada.
The biotechnology industry has portrayed
this experience as successful, suggesting
the crops are popular and bring significant
benefits to farmers. There has been little
questioning of this picture, and it has
added to the already substantial pressure
for the introduction of GM crops here. In
the face of these widely reported industry
claims of total success, we set out to see if
in fact there were any problems and if so
what they were.
To our amazement, the feedback from
farmers and industry analysts in North

America is that across the whole industry
there have been more problems than
successes. There have been some beneficial
aspects, but a large number of serious
problems. Unless these experiences are
properly considered, there is a real danger
that the forthcoming decision in the UK
will be taken on a misleadingly narrow
and theoretical basis.
The three year programme of farm-scale
GM trials has been repeatedly presented by
the government and biotechnology industry
as the cornerstone for the decision on GM
crops. The AEBC has been critical of this,
stressing that there are many important
questions that the trials will not answer.
The trials have always had a very narrow
remit. They are investigating only the
short-term impact of the management
regime of one group of GM crops,
herbicide tolerant GM crops, on farmland
biodiversity. They will reveal little about the
environmental or wider impacts of GMOs,
nor about the impact on farmers and the
agricultural industry, and the results will
only be applicable to those particular crops
and not to commercial growing involving
continuous use of one or more GM crops.
Concerns about GMOs have been
voiced mainly by the general public and
environmental organisations. The major
food retailers and manufacturers in the
UK have responded by adopting GM-free
sourcing policies. In contrast, the apparent
interest from the farming industry has
probably provided the only real support
for the government’s wish to proceed down
the GM path, apart from the biotechnology
sector itself. However, individual farmers
who would be the clients of this technology
and at the forefront of any negative impacts,
have received little information about the
implications of GM crops, other than from
the biotechnology companies. While there
is as yet little data on the potential
environmental and health risks, there is
now plenty of information on the impact
of GM crops on farmers across the Atlantic.
It is important that the UK farming
community takes this opportunity to learn
the lessons from those who have already
tried these crops on a large scale. With
UK agriculture still suffering a deep
economic crisis, the temptation to seize

8 SEEDS OF DOUBT

a new technology is great. But in North
America, farmer ignorance was one of the
biotechnology industry’s greatest marketing
assets – it explains to a large extent how
GM crops were introduced there in the
first place.
The Soil Association has a particular
interest in the impacts of GM crops. The
organisation exists to promote sustainable,
healthy food production and is the main
certifier and promoter of organic food and
farming in the UK. To ensure sustainable
and healthy food production, the principles
of organic agriculture centre on the need
for farming practices to be based on natural
biological processes and a precautionary
approach to safety issues. On this basis,
the International Federation of Organic
Agriculture Movements (IFOAM), with the
full support of the Soil Association, agreed
in 1994 that there is no place for GM
technology in organic agriculture. Organic
production standards worldwide now
prohibit the use of GMOs by law. The fact
that organic food is GM-free is one of the
key reasons for the consumer demand for
organic food in the UK.
The organic food sector offers farmers
a major and growing high value market.
The retail market is now worth over
£9o0 million in the UK and was £15 billion
worldwide in 2000,1 several times larger
than the global market for GM seeds
estimated at $3.7 billion (the only relevant
market is for GM seed; there is no specific
demand for GM food).2 The government
is increasingly recognising the economic
and environmental opportunities of organic
farming and is investing in its development.
However, the real danger remains that,
should GM crops be commercialised, they
could severely damage the sector’s future.
The Soil Association has expressed concern
for many years that GM contamination could
disrupt the ability of farmers to supply the
organic market and consumers to buy UK
organic food. But this problem is not special
to the organic sector. As long as the public
want a choice of GM-free food and clear
labelling of GM products, GM crops have
the potential to disrupt the non-organic
farming sector as well.
This report will help farmers and farm
policy officials to weigh up the merits and
drawbacks of GM crops. It looks at the
three main GM crops being grown in North
America which could also be grown in the
UK: soya, maize and oilseed rape. Through
a review of some of the academic evidence
and farmers’ own experiences, it sets out
the agronomic, economic and legal impacts

on farmers. It examines the immediate
impact of GM crops on yield, agrochemical
use, and farmer income. It looks at the
indirect impacts such as the development
of herbicide resistant volunteer plants,
contamination, farmer choice and the legal
consequences for farmers. It also examines
the wider impacts on trade and the farming
economy.

SEEDS OF DOUBT 9

2

Context

GM crops around the world

GM crops were first grown commercially
in 1996 in the US, but, six years later, most
countries are still not growing GM crops.
Four countries account for 99 per cent of
the total area of GM crops, and they include
the US and Canada. The global area stood
at 52.6 million hectares in 2001.

2000 they accounted for 91 per cent of
the total GM area. Syngenta (formerly
Novartis/AstraZeneca), Aventis CropScience
(formerly AgrEvo, now acquired by Bayer)
and Dupont account for virtually all the
remaining commercial plantings of GM
crops.2 It is estimated that the global market
for GM seeds totalled $3.67 billion last year.3

The main GM growing countries1
Country

Total area GM in
2001 (million ha)

% of global GM
crop area in 2001

USA
Argentina
Canada
China

35.7
11.8
3.2
1.5

68%
22%
6%
3%

The key GM crops and companies

Four main GM crops are being grown
commercially: soya, cotton, oilseed rape
and maize. They account for 99 per cent
of the total global GM acreage.2 However,
only 19 per cent of the global area planted
to these crops in 2001 was GM. Three of
these GM crops could be grown in the UK:
soya, rape and maize; all are used principally
for animal feed and vegetable oils and soya
is used in a wide range of processed food.
The main crops that have GM varieties1
Crop

Total area planted
2001 (million ha)

Soya
72
Cotton
34
Oilseed rape 25
Maize
140

% of total area
that is GM
46%
20%
11%
7%

These crops have been engineered with
just two traits. One set of GM crops are
resistant to particular herbicides so that
the herbicides can still be applied to the
field while the crop plants are growing, for
example Roundup Ready (RR) soya, oilseed
rape and maize. The other set produce
an insecticide, the toxin from the bacteria
Bacillus thuringiensis, to make the crop,
such as Bt maize, resistant to insect attack.
Four companies produce almost all
of these four crops. The US company
Monsanto dominates the market: in

GM crops in the US and Canada

In the US, the principal soya states are:
Alabama, Arkansas, North Dakota, South
Dakota, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
Louisiana, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri,
Nebraska and Ohio.4 Of the three main GM
feed crops, the GM soya hectarage grew
most rapidly and was about 65 per cent of
the total soya area in 2001.
The principal maize growing states
are: South Dakota, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri,
Nebraska, Ohio and Wisconsin.4 According
to a survey carried out for the American
Corn Growers Association of 509 maize
producers, the percentage of the total
maize area planted to GM maize in 2001
was 21 per cent (+/- 4.5 per cent).5
Oilseed rape has only been approved
for growing in two US states since 2001.
In Canada, oilseed rape is the main GM
crop grown on the prairies. Approximately,
60 per cent of the rape there is GM.6 Maize
and soya in Canada are primarily grown in
Ontario.7

GM policies of UK retailers

All of the major UK food retailers have
GM-free policies for their own brand
products. The Co-op, Iceland, Marks
and Spencer, Safeway, Sainsbury, Tesco
and Waitrose have all made statements
confirming this position.8 They are all
also in the process of introducing GM-free
animal feed policies for their meat and
dairy products. For example Sainsbury
“is committed to the removal of GM from
animal feed,” the Co-op is trying to ensure
that “no Co-op brand product is derived
from animals fed upon a diet containing
GM crops” and Safeways informed its

10 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Saskatchewan

Alberta

Manitoba

Ontario
Montana

Minnesota

North Dakota
Michigan
Wisconsin
Ohio
Indiana
Illinois
Missouri

South Dakota
Nebraska

Iowa

Kansas
Arkansas
Mississippi
Louisiana

Georgia
Alabama

Provinces and states where GM soya, maize and oilseed rape are grown

suppliers that it wished “to achieve non-GM
status for animal feed as soon as possible.” 9

The organic food and farming sector

The global organic food market has being
growing rapidly over the last few years and
stood at £15 billion in 2000. The US has the
largest organic market at almost £5 billion in
2000 and has been reporting annual growth
of over 20 per cent The area of organic
farmland, however, was only 0.22 per cent
of total US farmland. The Canadian organic
sector is comparatively underdeveloped, with
only 188,000 ha being farmed organically
in 2000 and a small organic food market.
The UK has the fastest growing and
most import dependent organic market
in Europe, with a retail value of over
£900 million in the year to April 2002.
The area of organically managed land stood
at 3.2 per cent of total UK farmland in 2001,
slightly over the EU average of nearly three
per cent in 2001. This was farmed by 3,700
producers. The government is investing in
the growth of the organic sector and one of
its “public service agreements” is an increase
in the area of organic farming.10

Research for the report

In January and February 2002, one of the
authors of this report travelled around the
Midwest of the United States interviewing
farmers who have been affected by the
commercial growing of GM crops. These
included farmers who had grown GM crops
as well as organic farmers whose livelihoods
were threatened by neighbouring GM crops.
Literature research was also undertaken –
focusing on the data and analysis of
independent US and Canadian experts
and government bodies, rather than that
supplied by the biotechnology industry.

SEEDS OF DOUBT 11

“The application of biotechnology at present is
most likely … not to increase maximum yields. More
fundamental scientific breakthroughs are necessary
if yields are to increase.”
USDA, 2001 Agriculture Information Bulletin1

3

Yield
GM crops were marketed on the promise
of significant yield increases. For example,
an advert for Monsanto’s Asgrow soya in
2002 stated: “Asgrow varieties return more
and yield higher because they’re driven
by progress,” 2 and in relation to Roundup
Ready maize the company claimed
“outstanding yields.” 3 After six years
of commercial production, there is
only a limited amount of independent
information for farmers on the actual
yield performance and other impacts of
GM crops. Nevertheless, the information
available generally indicates that the
outcome has been very different to the
claims made by the biotechnology industry.
Analyses of several years of data by a few
independent researchers and the Economic
Research Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) show
that, for soya, maize, and rape, they have
mostly failed to live up to the claims. The
results differ between crop and region,
and also from year to year. Overall, yields
are lower for Roundup Ready (RR) soya and
apparently also RR rape, and have increased
for only one crop, Bt maize, and then by
only a small amount which was not enough
to cover the extra production costs. Though
there is some information on yield for all
GM crops, the most solid evidence available
is for RR soya.

RR soya

A poll of 800 Iowa farmers by Iowa State
University revealed that the principal reason
why farmers chose to plant RR soya (53 per
cent) was because they thought it increased
yields.4 However, RR soya stands out as the
GM crop that has failed most obviously, with
both the research data from US and Canada
and farmers’ personal accounts testifying to

significant yield decreases.
Researchers from the University of
Nebraska conducted a controlled field
experiment at four locations over two
years to evaluate the effect that genetically
engineered glyphosate resistance had on
soya yield. They compared five Roundup
Ready varieties with near isogenic lines –
that is crops where the only difference
between the GM and non-GM varieties
was the genetic modification. They also
compared them with high-yielding non-GM
soya varieties. In a paper published in
Agronomy Journal in 2001, they concluded
that genetically engineered soya yielded six
per cent less than non-GM ‘sister lines’ and
11 per cent less than high yielding non-GM
soya.5 Importantly, this study is one of the
only side by side controlled trials comparing
GM crop yields with their identical non-GM
varieties; it is also one of the few peer
reviewed, published studies on GM yields.
It is supported by other research.
In 1999 and 2000, over 10,000
comparative RR versus conventional soya
varietal trials were carried out across the US,
including a series of independent university
trials. Dr Charles Benbrook, an independent
agronomy consultant in Idaho, has analysed
this data and found that the results are fairly
consistent. They show that RR soya produces
a yield decline of five per cent to 10 per cent
in most circumstances.6
Benbrook also took a cross section of the
university trial results from three US states
and found that comparisons with the top
performing conventional varieties provide
some even worse results. In Indiana, the top
RR variety offered by three seed companies
yielded on average 15.5 per cent less than
the top conventional variety; in Iowa the
reduction was 19 per cent; and in Illinois
the reduction was less than one per cent.6
This is confirmed by feedback from

12 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Newell Simrall
Monsanto subsidiary
Jacob Hartz Seed
Company claimed that
their Roundup Ready
soya seeds were “top
quality, disease resistant,
high yielding seeds.”
But the Mississippi
state court ruled in
September 2001 that
they were responsible
for the reduced yields
obtained by Mississippi
farmer Newell Simrall,
and confirmed the award
of $165,742 in damages
to him.20, 21

the industry. For example, Canadian soya
merchant Gerald Fowler said in 1999
that the reduction is “about 10 per cent
quoted by most [farmers] in this area.” 7
These results stand in stark contrast
to the claims made by the biotechnology
companies. Monsanto literature in 1998
stated that they had achieved an average
five percent increase in yields with their
RR soya.8

Bt maize

In a summary of the studies of various
researchers the USDA determined that
Bt maize produced higher yields, “in most
years and some regions.” 9 In a later study
Dr Benbrook concluded that Bt maize had
resulted in a small yield increase of around
3.9 bushel/acre.10 The average yield in 2000
was 148 bushel/acre,11 so this represents
an increase of around 2.6 per cent.

HT maize

In 2001, the USDA stated, “adopting
herbicide tolerant corn did not increase
yields.” 1 Again, this contrasts with the

impression given by the advertising:
“Outstanding yields and reduced input
costs … the Roundup Ready corn system
costs less, while allowing hybrids to reach
their maximum yield potential.” 3

RR rape

A study by University of Saskatchewan
researchers published in 1999 revealed
that the yields of Roundup Ready oilseed
rape fell around 7.5 per cent short of
conventional rape. The RR rape managed
33 bushel/acre while the conventional
achieved 35.7 bushel/acre.12

Backtracking on claims

Many industry supporters have now started
to backtrack from the earlier claims about
higher yields. In 1999, USDA did a general
assessment of the performance of GM crops
in 1997 and 1998, including GM cotton,
looking at data for the different crops and
regions. At the time they concluded that in
two thirds of cases, 12 out of 18 crop/region
combinations, there were no significant
differences in yield between GM and non-

YIELD 13

Michael Alberts
Michael Alberts, from
Marquette, Nebraska,
farms just over 1,000
acres of land, mainly
growing maize and soya.
He was interested in using
Roundup Ready soya
as a way of keeping
his fields clean but was
disappointed to find that
“Roundup Ready beans
do not yield as well as
conventional beans.
The conventional
beans harvested about
20 bushels/acre more
than the Roundup
Ready beans.”19

George Holkup
George Holkup from
Wilton, North Dakota
was thinking of buying
Roundup Ready maize
last year, but he was
talked out of it by the
seed salesman. He was
told that it wouldn’t
canopy and that it was
yielding 10 –15
bushels/acre less.22

GM crops, while in a third of cases GM yield
were higher.13 By 2001, they had concluded
that biotechnology was most likely “not to
increase maximum yields. More fundamental
scientific breakthroughs are necessary if
yields are to increase.” 1

Why claims have not been realised

No commercial GM variety has yet been
engineered specifically to have a higher
physiological yield potential; the focus of
genetic engineers so far has been weed and
pest management. For this reason, all cases
where farmers have experienced increased
yields have been as a result of reduced crop
damage from pests or reduced weed
competition. This also means that yield
increases only occur if the control achieved
with the GM crop is needed and is greater
than would be obtained with conventional
methods.14 In the case of Bt crops, as corn
borer attacks are episodic and not always a
problem, there is only a yield gain in those
regions and seasons where and when pest
levels are significant.15
The yield reductions in RR soya seem to
result from three specific problems: the use
of lower yielding varieties by the breeders,

a negative side effect of the genetic
engineering process, and a negative side
effect of the glyphosate herbicide that is
applied to the plants.
The University of Nebraska study
concluded that the 11 per cent reduction
in RR soya yields was due to two factors.
There was a six per cent reduction due
to an unintended side effect of the genetic
engineering, either related to the gene
or to the insertion process. Clearly, this
effect had either not been identified
prior to commercialisation or had not
been publicised. The other five per cent
reduction in yield was due to the fact that
the GM varieties were based on lower
yielding cultivars.5
The genetic engineering of RR soya
seems to have had a negative side effect
on the plant’s ability to deal with stress,
such as excessive cold or heat, or a mineral
or microbial imbalance in the soil. These
problems are believed to have arisen
because the genetic material that is
randomly inserted into RR crops to make
them tolerant to the herbicide has also
altered the functioning of other biochemical
pathways which control the plants’ stress
responses. The result of this, concluded
Dr Benbrook, in a statement in 2002 is

14 SEEDS OF DOUBT

3. Key points
★ The main reason
farmers say they
chose GM crops was
for increased yields
★ On average, the claims
of increased yield have
not been realised for
most GM crops; some
have reduced yields
★ RR soya yields six
per cent less than
otherwise identical
non-GM varieties and
11 per cent less than
high-yielding non-GM
soya varieties. This is
thought to be partly
due to a side effect
of the genetic
engineering process
★ RR rape yields less
than non-GM rape
★ HT maize has not
produced higher yields
★ Bt maize produced a
yield increase of about
2.6 per cent, which
was not enough to
offset the higher
production costs.

that, “It now appears that RR crops are
more vulnerable to certain diseases and
insect pests under some relatively common
circumstances, which will in the long run
either increase the use of other pesticides
or decrease yields.” 16
Research published by University of
Arkansas scientists in 2000 revealed another
unintended side effect: the glyphosate
herbicide disrupts the nitrogen fixation
process in RR soya. Root development,
nodulation and nitrogen fixation were
found to be impaired in some RR varieties,
and this is exacerbated in dry or low fertility
conditions. According to the study, this is
caused by sensitivity of the bacteria that
fix the nitrogen, Bradyrhizobium japonicum,
to Roundup.17 The data revealed that the
effect of the delay and decrease in nitrogen
fixation means yields can be down by up
to 25 per cent.16 Unfortunately, this
information was only available after 100
million acres of RR soya had already been
planted in America.
The poor overall yield performance of
most GM varieties may be due to a general
problem with GM crops. The task that the
new gene performs requires additional
energy which will detract from the plant’s
capacity to grow normally.15
Where an increase in yields has been
reported for a GM variety, it could be due
to reasons which are not related to the GM
trait. Higher yields may simply be due to the
fact that a higher yielding hybrid has been
used by the biotechnology companies,
rather than necessarily due to the genetic
modification; in other words it would have
been higher yielding even were it issued as
a non-GM variety.18
Yield information from farmers will
be affected by the availability of different
varieties on the market. Farmers in North
America have reported that over the last few
years, as the GM varieties were introduced,
the availability of good non-GM varieties on
the market has been significantly reduced.19
This will to some extent be obscuring the
comparative performance of GM and
non-GM crops on the ground in favour
of GM crops.
There is a final problem with the yields
from GM crops. GM varieties increase
farmer seed costs by 25 per cent to 40 per
cent an acre, so yields have to be higher
and/or other costs lower for farmers to
break even. Thus, even where the data shows
that yields have increased for some farmers,
the increase may not be sufficient to avoid
the farmers being worse off financially. For
example, although US farmers who planted

Bt maize harvested on average 3.9 more
bushels/acre over the last six years, this still
did not cover the extra costs of growing the
GM crop. Yield would have had to rise by
over another bushel an acre to cover the
higher production costs.10

SEEDS OF DOUBT 15

“In most regions where Roundup Ready beans have
been planted for more than three years, herbicide
reliance continues to increase as a result of the
combination of weed shifts and resistances.”
Dr Charles Benbrook, agronomist, Idaho, 2000 1

4

Bill Christison
Bill Christison is president
of the US National Family
Farm Coalition. When
growing conventional
soya, he uses 10 to 12
ounces of chemicals an
acre. But he has seen
what farmers who are
growing Roundup Ready
soya are doing. First they
spray to clear the ground
of weeds before planting,
then when the beans
emerge, weeds also
appear so there needs
to be reapplication of
Roundup. “Most farmers
have found that they
should also use a residual
herbicide to help kill
the weeds because the
weeds have become
somewhat resistant to
Roundup,” he explained.
“The upshot is that you
could easily use 60 to 75
ounces of chemical per
acre. What you have is
a yield loss and a huge
amount more chemical
being applied per acre.”2

Agrochemical use
Proponents of biotechnology have long
claimed that GM herbicide tolerant (HT)
and Bt crops would significantly reduce
agrochemical use and simplify weed and
pest management. They also claimed they
would reduce the use of older, more toxic
herbicides. These claims were the
centrepiece of Monsanto’s marketing
strategy in 1998 and they have been
the main reason put forward by the
biotechnology industry for the argument
that GM crops could be environmentally
beneficial.
However, independent analysis of four
years of USDA data indicates that, contrary
to the claims, more herbicide and insecticide
is being used with HT crops and Bt maize.
Some of the benefits have turned out to
be short-lived because the intended weed
control strategy affected yields and because
new weed and volunteer problems have
emerged as a result of HT crops. There
are indications that the use of GM crops is
resulting in a reversion to the use of older,
more toxic compounds.
The main reason why GM crops have been
popular with farmers has been the attraction
of the convenience of herbicide tolerant and
insect resistant crops, and the fact that the
greater freedom of herbicide use enables
more weed control. However, this is being
undermined by the emergence of several
new weed problems and the need for
farmers to take special measures against
the development of insect resistance.

4.1 Herbicides
Two herbicide tolerant (HT) GM crops
are grown commercially in North America.
Roundup Ready crops have been engineered
to be resistant to Monsanto’s herbicide

Roundup, a brand name for the chemical
glyphosate. Similarly, though not grown
on the same scale, Liberty Link crops are
resistant to Aventis’ herbicide Liberty,
the brand name for glufosinate. The
biotechnology companies had claimed
that they would require only one
application of herbicide.
However, unforeseen problems
have meant that herbicide use has not
decreased in the way intended. According
to independent analyst Dr Benbrook, US
government statistics confirm that GM HT
crops increased the average amount of
herbicide applied to the land.3

RR soya

One study of crop data from 172 fields in
Iowa concluded that herbicide applications
were less frequent on RR soya.4 However,
from USDA data for 1998, Dr Benbrook,
concluded that RR soya requires “more
herbicides than conventional soybeans,
despite claims to the contrary. This
conclusion is firmly supported by unbiased
field-level comparisons of the total pounds
of herbicide active ingredient applied on
an average acre of RR soybeans in contrast
to conventional soybeans.” 5 Comparisons
with the extremes of herbicide use were
particularly dramatic. Benbrook’s analysis
revealed that the 10 per cent most heavily
treated fields (predominantly RR) required
at least 34 times more herbicide than the
bottom 10 per cent (planted to non-GM
varieties).5
By 2001, Benbrook was able to draw
on four years of USDA data and concluded
that modestly more pounds of herbicides
are applied to the average acre of RR
soya compared to non-GM soya, and that
herbicide use on RR soya is gradually rising.

16 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Glyphosate
Glyphosate herbicides
are marketed as benign.
They certainly are an
improvement over older,
more toxic chemicals,
but when Monsanto
went as far as
advertising Roundup
as ‘biodegradable’ and
‘environmentally friendly’,
the New York State
attorney general
successfully challenged
them. Monsanto was
required to stop using
these descriptions and
had to pay $50,000
towards the legal fees.11
There is a strong
body of independent
research that glyphosate,
an organophosphorous
compound, is harmful.
A Californian study
showed that it was
the third most frequent
cause of illness amongst
agricultural workers.12
Harmful effects recorded
have included eczema
and respiratory
problems.13 It has
toxic effects on some
beneficial soil organisms,
including negative effects
on nitrogen-fixing
bacteria in legumes,
and it increases crop
susceptibility to disease.
It is very mobile and
can leach easily, and
can remain active in
the soil for over four
months. Many of the
formulations are acutely
toxic to fish.12

In addition, “Average per acre pounds of
herbicide applied on RR soybeans exceeds
by two to 10-fold herbicide use on the
approximate 30 per cent of soybean acres
where farmers depend largely on low-dose
imidazolinone and sulfonylurea herbicides.” 3
Indeed, as early as 1997 it was evident that
the claims that RR soya would require no
more than one application were foundering.
An Iowa State University scientist revealed
to a British crop protection conference
that, while in 1996 a single application of
herbicide had been used for RR soya, in
1997, planting conditions were different
and unless alternative weed management
was included, a second, or even third
application was necessary.6
This contrasts with Monsanto’s claims
that “herbicide use was, on average, lower
in Roundup Ready soyabean fields than
in other US soyabean fields” and that
a reduction of 22 per cent was to be
expected.7

RR maize

According to Dr Benbrook, USDA data
also revealed that, in 2000, RR maize
was treated with about 30 per cent more
herbicide on average than non-GM maize.3

Liberty Link maize

Maize growers have found that Liberty
Link does not achieve adequate weed
control without repeated applications of
glufosinate. A majority are therefore now
using the more toxic, persistent herbicide
atrazine in addition to glufosinate, according
to Dr Mike Owen of Iowa State University.
Aventis/Bayer had claimed that one of the
main benefits of the GM maize would be
the substitution of atrazine with glufosinate.8

HT rape

Glufosinate
Glufosinate is highly
soluble and classed as
persistent and mobile
by the US Environmental
Protection Agency. It is
toxic to beneficial soil
organisms and some
aquatic organisms.14

A survey of crop management practices
of 650 oilseed rape growers in Canada of
the 1997 to 2000 crop, carried out by the
Canadian canola industry, found HT rape
had been treated on average about 20 per
cent more often than non-GM crops, with
2.1 herbicide applications to Roundup
Ready and Liberty Link crops compared to
1.8 applications to non-GM crops.9 Though
farmers may reduce their use in the first
year, they are using more in the following
years to control volunteer GM rape.10

Why herbicide use has not gone down

Increases in herbicide use were probably to
be expected with HT crops. Both glyphosate
and glufosinate are broad spectrum
herbicides that are toxic to most plants
including normal crop plants, so they
normally cannot be applied to a field once
the crop has grown. GM herbicide tolerant
technology means that farmers can now use
these chemicals during the growing period.
Farmers are generally keen to eliminate as
many weeds as possible and often aim for
completely ‘clean’ fields, even if complete
weed control is not necessary or advisable
in overall economic terms. HT crops enable
farmers to achieve this aim. For example,
easier and better weed control was the top
reason given by western Canadian growers
for chosing HT rape.9 While HT crops are
therefore a very easy and attractive option
for farmers, they set agriculture back on a
more chemical dependent path.
The claim that GM crops would result
in lower agrochemical use was based on the
flexibility of being able to use the herbicide
at any time. This meant that it could then
be applied at the most effective time for
weed control, and thus require only one
application. However, farmers have found
that, for a single application to be sufficient
for weed control purposes, it needs to be
applied at a late stage in crop development,
by which time the weeds have been present
most of the time and caused a yield loss.
In practice, most farmers are therefore
applying herbicides several times throughout
the life cycle of the HT crop.6 This could be
anything up to six applications of glyphosate
in total.15 Many farmers are also still using
other herbicides as well as glyphosate and
glufosinate, such as applying persistent
herbicides before the crop emerges that
will have a continuous effect.16
This intense use of glyphosate is leading
to new weed control problems which are
gradually offsetting the convenience of HT
crops. Different weed species are not equally
susceptible and shifts are occurring in the
composition of the weeds in the fields,
towards species that are less affected by the
herbicide.3 In most states with a substantial
RR soya acreage, there is also now evidence
of weed species developing resistance to
glyphosate.17 These weeds are requiring
much heavier applications of herbicides.
The experience in Iowa shows that
shifts in weed populations can happen very
rapidly. For example, common waterhemp
(Amaranthus rudis) populations delayed
germination and escaped the glyphosate
applications. Already in 1997, velvetleaf

AGROCHEMICAL USE 17

4.1 Key points
★ Herbicide tolerant
(HT) crops have been
widely adopted as
they have reduced
the normal constraints
on herbicide use
★ The claim by the
biotechnology
companies that HT
crops would only
require one herbicide
application and so
reduce agrochemical
use has not been
realised in practice
★ RR soya, RR maize and
HT rape appear to be
resulting in a greater
use and reliance on
herbicides particularly
after a few years
★ A single application
has turned out to
be impractical as it
affected yields; instead
farmers are applying
herbicide several
times in the pursuit
of completely ‘clean’
fields, or applying
older and more toxic
herbicides in addition
★ New weed problems
have emerged with HT
crops which are leading
to a greater need for
herbicides
★ These include the
appearance of more
weed species which
are less affected by
herbicides, weeds
becoming resistant
to herbicide and HT
rape volunteer plants.

(Abutilon theophrasti) demonstrated a
greater tolerance to glyphosate and farmers
reported problems controlling this weed
with the rates of glyphosate for which they
were willing to pay.6 In Missouri, where over
half the soya crop is GM, farm advisers
report that waterhemp has become an
increasing problem in recent years.
According to them, 2001 was a “fantastic
year for waterhemp,” with “even good
managers being frustrated.”18 In March
2002, farm advisers at the University of
Mississippi reported the appearance of
resistant horseweed that was requiring a
six to thirteen-fold increase in the amount
of glyphosate to achieve the same levels of
control as normal horseweed.15
HT crops also encourage higher
agrochemical use because they facilitate
“no-till” farming. Traditionally, land is
ploughed before the seeds are sown, and
this mechanical action kills off many weeds.
With no-till farming, however, the land is
only at most surface tilled and weeds which
would otherwise have been killed by the
ploughing are treated instead with heavier
applications of herbicide.19
There is also the widespread arrival of
herbicide resistant oilseed rape volunteer
plants in Canada, a serious problem for
weed control which is leading to a much
greater use of herbicides (this is reported
in detail in chapter 7, ‘contamination’).
HT volunteers and the change in weed
population, and resistance, means that
in many cases farmers also appear to be
reverting to older and more toxic herbicides
as a result of HT crops.
Finally, the claims that HT crops would
reduce agrochemical use overlooks the
fact that many farmers have already begun
adopting modern weed control practices
which involve a greatly reduced use of
herbicides. For example, integrated
crop management (ICM) uses specific
management practices to reduce weed
problems. Organic farmers have taken
this approach furthest and do not use
any herbicides at all, though they do have
higher costs of production as a result.

4.2 Pesticides
Two of the GM crops being grown
commercially in North America produce
an insecticide in their tissues: Bt maize and
Bt cotton. The gene for the production of
the Bt toxin was engineered into maize to
reduce attacks by two caterpillar pests, the

European corn borer and the Southwestern
corn borer.20 In the US, approximately 26
per cent of the total maize area was planted
with Bt maize in 2001.21
Monsanto claimed that these crops
“require less pesticide application.” 22
However, overall insecticide applications
on maize have slightly increased. Bt cotton
has successfully produced a reduced use
of insecticides overall, though problems
are already being reported.

Bt maize

Despite a significant increase in the area
of Bt maize, the area of maize treated
with European corn borer insecticide
rose slightly from 6.75 per cent in 1995
to 7.3 per cent in 2000, according to
Dr Benbrook.3 The proportion of the total
maize area that was sprayed with insecticide
for all pests did not decrease, but remained
constant over five years at 30 per cent of the
total, according to Professor John Obrycki’s
research team at Iowa State University.23

Bt cotton

Bt cotton has successfully reduced the
overall use of insecticides for bollworms
and budworms. The effects, however, have
varied widely from state to state, with some
having almost eliminated the use of
insecticides for these pests and others
having almost doubled their use.24 Reports
from the US and other countries (China and
Australia) indicate that total insecticide use
will increase again due to the development
of insect resistance and increases in other
pests after a few years.25, 26

Why insecticide use on GM maize is up

It should have been clear from the outset
that the scope for Bt maize to reduce
insecticide use was limited. The European
corn borer is only a problem on average
one year in five, with many regions each
year where it does little damage.27 Moreover,
although insecticides alone do not provide
full control in an outbreak,17 modern
integrated pest control methods can
achieve adequate control through specific
management practices and targeted use of
insecticides. Organic farming relies almost
fully on alternative pest control practices
and only uses very few insecticides, such as
natural Bt, as a secondary means of control.

18 SEEDS OF DOUBT

4.2 Key points
★ Bt maize has been
genetically engineered
to continuously
produce the insecticide,
Bt toxin, in its tissues
★ It was claimed that
Bt crops require less
insecticide use, but the
maize area sprayed has
not decreased and the
amount of chemical
applied has slightly
increased
★ Bt maize can only
control the European
and the Southwestern
corn borer, so farmers
are stillapplying
insecticides for other
insect pests
★ Bt cotton has so far
successfully reduced
the overall use of
pesticides, though the
development of insect
resistance is likely to
lead to increased use
in future
★ To prevent the
development of insects
resistance to Bt, maize
farmers are advised to
grow no more than
50–80 per cent of
their total maize area
to Bt maize
★ The development
of resistant insects
could render Bt crops
redundant and
undermine the less
intensive use of natural
Bt by organic farmers.

Bt crops can also only resist the specific
pests for which they were designed, so for
many farmers there is still a need to apply
other pesticides. Professor Obrycki’s team
concluded, in a review in Bioscience in
2001, that the use of Bt maize would
not significantly reduce insecticide use
since “Bt plantings are not being used as a
replacement for insecticides, but in addition
to them.” 23 In addition, the effects of Bt
maize are limited by the fact that farmers
are restricted to planting no more than
50–80 per cent of their total maize area
to Bt maize by the US Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA).
The general consensus for why insecticide
use has increased with the introduction
of Bt maize is that all the academic and
industry focus on Bt maize and the
European corn borer has led farmers
to become more aware of their insect
problems, including other pests such as
armyworms. Insecticide use has gone up
for all of these insects, including European
corn borers.17

Pest resistance and ‘refuges’

One problem with Bt crops is that they
will encourage insect pests to become
resistant to the toxin. This would not
only bring the point of Bt crops to an
early end, but it would undermine organic
production systems.
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is a naturally
occurring bacteria which has long been
used as a highly selective biological control
agent against caterpillars in organic farming.
The spores are applied in spray form when
the need arises. According to a survey by
the Organic Farming Research Foundation,
organic growers in the US use Bt sprays
more than any other product to manage
insect pests; over 50 per cent use Bt
frequently or occasionally.24
Although Bt has been used for a long
time, the risk of pest resistance developing
has been considerably inflated by the
introduction of Bt crops. Bt toxin in GM
crops is different from the use of natural Bt.
Natural Bt is only applied occasionally and
degrades within three days. The engineered
Bt genes, however, unlike naturally occurring
genes, are active the whole time and
throughout the plant, so Bt crops produce
the toxin continually in all their tissues. The
Bt gene is also being engineered into several
different crops at the same time. In response
to such constant and widespread exposure,
only insects with a natural immunity to the

toxin are expected to survive and form
the basis of a resistant population.
To address this problem, the Bt maize
sector and the EPA have instigated insect
resistance management plans “to preserve
the benefits of this technology for years to
come.” 28 However, this has introduced major
practical constraints on farmers who wish to
grow Bt crops. The plans require farmers in
the maize belt to plant at least 20 per cent
of their total maize area to non-Bt maize
varieties and farmers in southern states of
overlapping maize and cotton production
to plant at least 50 per cent to non-Bt
varieties.28 There are guidelines for how
this should be done.29
The idea is that these Bt-free ‘refuges’ will
maintain a population of susceptible insects
for mating with Bt resistant insects, and so
prevent the resistant insects from becoming
dominant. Clearly, this practical restriction
undermines the supposed convenience
of Bt crops, and a biotechnology industry
survey published in January 2001 found
that nearly 30 per cent of farmers who
grew Bt maize in 2000 were not following
the resistance management guidelines.30
Moreover, research suggests that the
rate of build up of resistance has been
underestimated. The refuge plans were
developed on the assumption that the
inheritance of the Bt resistance trait
would be recessive and thus slow to
evolve. But research published in Science,
in 2000 by Kansas State University shows
that the inheritance of resistance may be
“incompletely dominant,” meaning that
resistance may develop faster than
originally predicted.31

SEEDS OF DOUBT 19

“GMOs do not provide a quick fix solution to the
economic problems of US farmers. As time goes on
the technology is proving to be more of a hindrance
than a help.”
John Kinsman, vice-president of the National Family Farm
Coalition and dairy farmer in Wisconsin1

5

Farmer income

“There’s profit in your fields. Unleash it with
Asgrow Roundup Ready soybeans … With
Asgrow soybeans, profitability runs wild.”
US farming magazine advert, January 2002

2

The widespread introduction of GM crops
in North America was achieved through
promises of higher profits for farmers.
Many farmers were in a desperate economic
situation and ready to believe that GM crops
could help them into a better financial state.
However, the reality has been that GM
soya and maize have worsened the situation.
The results differ between regions and from
year to year, but overall the effect of these
crops on farm incomes has been negative.
Feedback from farmers and independent
economic analysis of the data from six years
of commercial growing show that these two
GM crops deliver less income on average to
farmers than non-GM crops. Furthermore,
those farmers producing GM-free produce
have been able to command price premiums
for their produce that, by definition, GM
farmers cannot access.
This section looks only at the direct
impact on farmer income of GM crops (the
indirect impacts of GM crops on the wider
farm economy are addressed in chapter 10).

HT soya

Analysis by Iowa State University economist
Michael Duffy has shown that, when all
production factors are taken into account,
herbicide tolerant GM soya loses more
money per acre than non-GM soya. GM soya
lost $8.87/acre while non-GM almost broke
even, losing $0.02/acre.3 This was based on
a conservative five per cent estimate for the
extra cost of the GM seed technology fee,

and assumed the same market price for
GM and non-GM soya, in other words
the differences are likely to have been
underestimated.

Bt maize

In a December 2001 report, Dr Charles
Benbrook presented the results of a detailed
analysis of the economics behind Bt maize.
The profitability of Bt maize is variable; it is
also hard to predict in advance as it depends
on the level of pest problems. On an annual
basis, the Bt varieties paid off on average in
three of the years they were grown (1996,
1997, 2001), but not in the other three
(1998, 1999, 2000). Over the whole
period the outcome was negative: “From
1996–2001, American farmers paid at least
$659 million in price premiums to plant
Bt corn, while boosting their harvest by only
276 million bushels – worth $567 million in
economic gain. The bottom line for farmers
is a net loss of $92 million – about $1.31
per acre” from growing Bt maize.4
Duffy undertook a similar analysis on
Bt maize. He also found little economic
evidence to account for the rapid uptake
of the GM variety. Returns per acre from
Bt maize were slightly worse, with Bt maize
losing $28.28/acre and non-Bt maize losing
$25.02/acre.3

HT rape

There is a scarcity of independent research
on the economics of growing HT rape.
However, one industry study of rape growers
suggested that while the herbicide use of
those growing HT rape was higher, farm

20 SEEDS OF DOUBT

5. Key points
★ Contrary to the industry
claims, GM crops have
reduced average
farm profitability
★ HT soya reduced
average returns by
about $8.8/acre
compared to
non-GM soya
★ Bt maize reduced
average returns by
about $1.3-$3.2/acre
compared to non-Bt
maize
★ GM seeds are
significantly more
expensive than
non-GM seeds as
farmers have to pay a
technology fee which
adds 25–40 per cent
to seed costs and
prevents them
saving seed
★ A significant fall in
herbicide prices has
offset the cost of
the greater use of
herbicides for HT crops
★ GM crops are receiving
lower market prices
than those available
for non-GM crops;
guaranteed GM-free
crops are obtaining
significant price
premiums.

incomes were slightly higher due to higher
yielding varieties, lower herbicide costs
and lower fuel costs.5 The Canadian
government’s Biotechnology Advisory
Committee said “As of January 2001 there
is no publicly available survey or data on
how individual farmers have benefited from
the adoption of GM crops in Canada.” 6

Why farmer incomes are down

The differences in income that a farmer will
receive from growing GM crops compared
to non-GM crops results from four factors,
covering both higher production costs and
lower market prices:
• The technology fee for GM seed
Seeds are an important cost of
production. For example, they typically
account for about 10 per cent of total
maize production costs.7 GM seeds
are significantly more expensive than
non-GM seeds because the biotechnology
companies charge an additional
‘technology fee’ on top of the seed
price. Monsanto describes this as a way
that growers can “share a portion” of the
extra profits that the crops will deliver.8
The scale of the fee can vary greatly
depending on the crop, the company
and the particular package on offer.
• With the technology fee, GM seeds cost
25–40 per cent more than non-GM seeds.9
For Bt maize, for example, the fees are
typically $8–$10/acre, about 30–35 per
cent higher than non-GM varieties, though
they can be up to $30/acre. RR soya can
have a technology fee of about $6/acre.4, 10
• To buy GM seeds, farmers also have
to sign a technology agreement with the
biotechnology companies. This contract
prohibits the farmer from saving seed
(retaining a proportion of the harvest
for planting the following year). With
approximately 20–25 per cent of farmers
traditionally saving their seed in the US,
this prohibition introduces another seed
cost for these farmers.
• Yield differences
The biotechnology companies claimed
that the higher costs would be more than
offset by the higher yields and reduction
in agrochemicals. However, RR soya and
RR rape produced lower yields than
non-GM varieties on average, and although
Bt maize produced a small yield increase
overall, it was not enough over the whole
period to cover the higher production
costs (see chapter 4).

• Agrochemical costs
Agrochemicals make up a large proportion
of farmers’ production costs. RR soya, RR
maize, Bt maize, and HT rape have mostly
resulted in an increase in agrochemical
use. However, because of a herbicide
‘price war’ that has erupted in the US,
herbicide costs have fallen significantly
since the introduction of GM crops.
In many cases it has meant that total
herbicide costs have significantly reduced.
Soya herbicide prices, for example,
have fallen over 40 per cent since the
introduction of RR soya in 1996. This has
greatly helped to offset all the higher costs
of RR soya (the price of seed, the yield
drag and higher agrochemical use).
• Lower market prices
Farmers did not bargain for the negative
effect that GM crops have had on market
prices (see chapter 10). Since the
introduction of GM crops a tiered market
has developed. Farmers growing GM crops
now receive lower market returns than
previously, and also lower prices than
those growing non-GM crops. The income
calculations by Benbrook and Duffy did
not take this into account.
• For those growing non-GM crops,
market premiums are available to offset
the fall in market prices. According to
a survey of 1,149 grain elevators in 11
Midwestern US states by the American
Corn Growers Association last autumn,
almost 20 per cent are offering farmers
premiums for non-GM corn and soya
ranging from 5–35 cents per bushel.11
• The farmers who have gained in
terms of market prices are those who
can supply guaranteed GM-free produce,
for the growing ‘identity preserved’ (IP)
markets which have developed since the
introduction of GM crops. For example,
according to Minnesota farmers Susan and
Mark Fitzgerald, GM-free soya receives
around 50 cents/bushel more than GM,
selling at $4.40/bushel (approximately
a 13 per cent increase) and organic soya
sells at $12/bushel, an additional premium
of 200 per cent.12
While there are some farmers growing
GM crops who have been able to cut their
production costs or increase yields with GM
crops, it appears that, for most producers,
any savings have been more than offset
by the technology fees and lower market
prices, as well as the lower yields and higher
agrochemical use of certain GM crops.

SEEDS OF DOUBT 21

“GM canola has, in fact, spread much more rapidly
than we thought it would. It’s absolutely impossible
to control … It’s been a great wake-up call about
the side effects of these GM technologies.”
Professor Martin Entz, University of Manitoba, 20011
“Farmers in this province are spending tens of
thousands of dollars trying to get rid of this
canola that they didn’t plant. They have to use
more and more powerful pesticides to get rid of
this technology.”
Professor Martin Phillipson, 20012

6

Herbicide resistant volunteers

Among the new set of problems that GM
crops have brought, the arrival of herbicide
tolerant (HT) volunteers and ‘superweeds’
emerges as a serious problem for farmers
who try growing GM crops.
Unless the farmer has decided to keep
growing the same crop on the same piece
of land forever, there is always the issue of
dealing with ‘volunteers’ – plants appearing
that were planted in previous seasons and
failed to germinate then or grew from spilt
seed from the previous crop. Normally,
these are dealt with in the same way as
other weeds, with a herbicide. But as
North American farmers are finding, if
the previous crop was an HT crop, the
volunteers will not always be controllable
with the preferred herbicide because of
their resistance to it.
When one looks at GM HT fields after
harvest, the inevitability of this problem
is clear. Michael Alberts from Marquette,
Nebraska had planted Roundup Ready soya
in 2001. The ground was still littered with
stubble and beans from the previous harvest
when visited in January 2002. He accepts
that he will have to use another herbicide
to clear the field before he can start
planting his next crop.
Many farmers are now facing HT
volunteer problems. Percy Schmeiser, a
farmer from Saskatchewan who has had
well publicised problems with GM rape,

said “I’ve had at least 100 farmers across
the west telling me about problems they’re
having with volunteer canola.” 3 In Manitoba
last year, farmers even experienced HT
volunteer rape plants growing past the
stage at which they could be controlled.4
In response, Monsanto have started to
send groups of students into the fields
in some areas to remove the volunteer
plants by hand - certainly a contrast to
the high-tech, sophisticated impression
of GM farming given in the advertisements.
The company said that they were making
every effort to satisfy producers who find
“unexpected volunteers” in their fields.
However, it is clear that Monsanto expects
GM rape farmers to be faced with resistant
volunteers for some time. “They tell me the
seed can sit dormant for up to five years”
said Ken Howell from Birsay, Saskatchewan.
“This is only the second year and it sounds
like there is still some seed out on my fields
that didn’t get cleaned up.” 5
All HT crops pose the risk of this
problem, but HT oilseed rape has emerged
as particularly risky. It is a relatively primitive
crop, retaining many characteristics of wild
species. One of these is that the seedpods
mature unevenly, and so farmers cut the
crop to allow it to dry prior to combining.
Upon maturity, the dry pods shatter
dropping a fraction of seed on the ground,
which will germinate later. Moreover, rape

22 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Chris Dzisiak
Chris Dzisiak from Dauphin, Manitoba, planted
a 156 acre field to Roundup Ready oilseed rape
in 1999. He has described this action as giving
him one year of gain and three years of pain.
The following year he planted the field to
wheat. He had Roundup Ready oilseed rape
volunteers that he had to control with the far
more toxic herbicide 2,4-D. But in 2001 the
problem became more acute. He applied a
‘pre-seed burn-off’, to chemically clear the
field of weeds prior to sowing, and planted
the field to flax. But when it became apparent
that the burn-off had failed to control the
Roundup Ready volunteers, he was forced
to apply a further herbicide mix. While this
killed off the volunteer weeds, his flax crop
was also affected, resulting in a yield loss of
three bushels/acre.
Dzisiak estimates that he lost $4,500 in
2001 and he expects to have problems in
2002 with more herbicide tolerant oilseed
rape pushing its way into his crop of peas.
His experience has left him sure that he will
never grow a Roundup Ready crop again.
“I certainly didn’t save myself any money and
I certainly didn’t save myself any time.”10

Michael Alberts
Michael Alberts from Marquette, Nebraska
had planted Roundup Ready soya in 2001.
The ground (pictured below) was still littered
with stubble and beans from the previous
harvest when visited in January 2002. He
accepts that he will have to use another
herbicide to clear the field before he can
start planting his next crop.

seeds can lie dormant for up to 10 years,
so there is the risk that the crop will be
contaminated with volunteers for years
to come.6 Oilseed rape is also known to
pollinate wild mustard, creating another
genepool that can store and re-distribute
the resistance traits.7

Multiple resistance – ‘superweeds’

There are now GM HT rape varieties which
are separately resistant to three different
herbicides, being grown commercially in
North America. One of the early scares
about GM crops was the potential that they
might create ‘superweeds’. The fear was
that through cross pollination, the trait for
herbicide tolerance would either move into
populations of related weed plants, making
them harder to control, or that through
successive generations herbicide tolerance
traits from different GM varieties would
combine, ‘stacking’ the genes for tolerance
to a number of different herbicides in
one plant.
The biotechnology industry had
repeatedly dismissed such concerns. When
asked about superweeds, Monsanto directed
enquiries to The Council for Biotechnology
Information, a GM industry funded
organisation. In February 2001, this stated
that new research findings “dispel fears
that biotech plants will become superweeds,
either in their own right or by breeding
with unmodified plants.”8
But Tony Huether’s experience (see
facing page) shows that gene-stacking was
already a problem in 1998, two years after
GM HT rape was first grown in Canada.
And his case is far from unique. In 1999,
Agriculture Canada, part of the Department
of Agriculture and Agri-food, found gene
stacking in all of the 11 locations it
investigated where Roundup Ready
and Liberty Link crops were growing
in adjoining fields.9 Weed scientists now
suspect that the occurrence of volunteers
with ‘stacked’ herbicide tolerant genes is
common in the Canadian prairies.11
In field trials, University of Idaho
researchers have confirmed that multiple
resistance develops at a very fast rate.
Through field trials they found that oilseed
rape plants can acquire three herbicide
tolerance genes – for glyphosate, glufosinate
and the imidazolinones – in just two years.
They also identified hybrids of oilseed rape
and weed species containing two herbicide
tolerant transgenes.9
Nevertheless, there is no monitoring

H E R B I C I D E R E S I S TA N T V O L U N T E E R S 2 3

of the exact extent to which multiple
resistant volunteers are emerging. In the
US, the problem has not yet arrived as the
commercialisation of GM rape was only
allowed in 2001 and then only for two
regions.9
Multiple-resistance is a result of gene
transfer between different HT varieties.
As with single-gene resistance, multipleresistance is a particular problem with
oilseed rape. As well as the problems of
the seed shattering, the length of dormancy
and related weed species, oilseed rape
produces very small, round, smooth seeds
that travel considerable distances in the
wind. Experiments carried out by the
government in Saskatchewan showed that
pollen from GM oilseed rape travels much
further than expected, at least 800 metres.
This is eight times the official Canadian
separation distance for pedigree seeds of
100 metres.12 In the UK just a 50 metre
separation distance is officially advised
between GM oilseed rape and conventional
non-GM varieties.13

Why HT volunteers increase herbicide use

The main problem for farmers of GM
HT crops is that they cannot rely on their
normal herbicide, and end up spending
extra time and money trying to deal with
the problem. This is harder if the plants
are multiple-resistant, but the farmer will
not know this until different herbicides
have been tried.
Another worrying outcome appears
to be the return to older, more toxic
herbicides, such as paraquat and 2,4-d,
the very chemicals that GM crops were
supposed to render obsolete. Paraquat is
a notoriously toxic herbicide, described by
Oxford University’s Chemistry Laboratory
as “very toxic by inhalation, ingestion and if
absorbed through skin.” It is also a possible
mutagen and carcinogen, and may be fatal
if swallowed, inhaled or absorbed through
the skin. It is very destructive of mucous
membranes and causes burns.14 2,4-d is
also exceedingly toxic; it was a component
of Agent Orange, the mutagenic effects
of which are still being suffered by a third
generation of Vietnamese (Agent Orange
was used in the chemical warfare attacks
on Vietnam in the 1960s).18 These chemicals
should now be obsolete, yet it seems that in
North America the commercial growing of
GM crops is reviving their use.
Another concern to farmers is that HT
volunteers have the potential to lock farmers

Tony Huether
Tony Huether farms in northern Alberta.
In 1998 he noticed some oilseed rape in a
field he wanted to use for wheat. He used
Roundup, but this failed to kill the plants.
Realising it was probably a relict of the GM
‘Quest’ oilseed rape he had planted the
previous year, which is tolerant to Roundup,
he tried a different herbicide, glufosinate.
This also failed to have an impact and he
knew he had a problem.
Specialists from Alberta Agriculture, the
state agriculture department, took samples
of Huether’s plants. They confirmed what
he suspected, that the plants had genetic
resistance to two herbicides – glyphosate and
glufosinate. They also found that seed from
the fields produced plants resistant to not just
these herbicides, but to a third herbicide as
well, imidazolinone, to which there is also
a rape variety that is resistant.
How this came about can be explained by
looking at the crops that Huether had grown
the year before. He had planted Monsanto’s
Quest oilseed rape tolerant to glyphosate in
one field. Across the road he planted 20 acres
of Innovator, a GM rape tolerant to Aventis’s
Liberty herbicide glufosinate.15 And the rest of
the same field went to 120 acres of another
GM variety, this time tolerant to Cynamid’s
Pursuit and Odyssey herbicides
(imidazolinones).16
A team from the University of Alberta
investigated the possibility that this was the
result of random mutations. But their results
showed clearly that it was the result of cross
pollination between the different GM HT
varieties. “DNA analysis of the seedlings
indicated contributions from more than one
resistant parent, clearly indicating that the
multiple resistance had arisen from pollen
transfer, rather than mutation. Evidence is
consistent with resistant gene movement via
pollen flow from one field to another.”17
To deal with these plants Huether had to
turn to the exceedingly toxic herbicide 2,4-D.
Huether’s case has served as a warning for the
risks that GM crops bring. “I’ve had my fill of
being controlled by large companies” he said.
“Monsanto led us to believe that this kind
of thing wouldn't happen. There were no
warnings until they were made aware of
what happened on my farm.”15

24 SEEDS OF DOUBT

6. Key points
★ HT rape has created
a widespread problem
for Canadian farmers
as some of the plants
are emerging in
following years as
herbicide resistant
volunteer weeds
★ In many locations,
cross-pollination
between different HT
varieties has produced
volunteers resistant to
several herbicides –
multiple-resistant
volunteers
★ Oilseed rape is a
particular risk among
HT crops, as the seeds
are scattered by the
seedpods and remain
dormant for up to
10 years
★ Farmers are resorting
to applying several
different and more
toxic herbicides in their
attempts to eradicate
the plants
★ In some areas
Monsanto has sent
in students to remove
the rogue GM plants
by hand
★ Monsanto has now
taken out a patent
for general mixtures
of herbicides, to control
GM weeds with
multiple resistance
or different GM weed
species. This will restrict
farmers from making
their own mixtures to
control volunteers in
the future.

into GM production. If a GM farmer decides
that he wants to return to non-GM crops
and he has HT volunteers, he may have a
problem supplying GM-free markets. Also
the very presence of these patented plants
on his land is a liability, as they might be
perceived as a legal infringement of a
company’s technology use agreement
(these issues are explored more in
chapters 7 – under ‘contamination’ –
and 11 – under ‘legal issues’).
It seems Monsanto does not intend to
send out hand-weeders for much longer:
the company has seen a commercial
opportunity in HT volunteers. In June
2001, it took out US patent no. 6,239,072
for general mixtures of different herbicides.
Extraordinarily, this covers the relatively
straightforward process of mixing herbicides,
and not just of pre-made mixtures but
apparently also mixtures made by farmers
themselves from herbicides they would
already have paid for, called tank mixtures.
The abstract states:
“The present invention is directed to tank
mixtures and premixtures of a glyphosate
herbicide and a second herbicide to which
a first species is susceptible and a second
species is resistant. Such tank mixtures and
premixtures allow control of glyphosatesusceptible weeds and glyphosate-tolerant
volunteer individuals of the first species in
a crop of glyphosate-tolerant second species
with a single application of herbicide.”19
The patent will enable the company to
profit from a problem that its products had
created in the first place, and it will make
it even more difficult and expensive for
farmers to control HT volunteers.

Superweeds are a reality

The prospect of superweeds was raised by
scientists as early as 1985, when the concerns
were focused on the weed population.20
Original and literature research by the
University of California on a wide range of
crops during the 1990s, confirmed that the
outcrossing of crop plants with wild relatives
“appears to be a general feature of most of
the world’s important crops,” suggesting that
weeds could indeed become a problem with
HT crops.21 Six years after the introduction
of GM HT crops in North America, it has
emerged that the HT crops themselves are
a severe weed problem for farmers.
In a review of the Canadian experience
with oilseed rape, English Nature, the UK
government’s advisory body on biodiversity,
concluded, “it is accepted that gene stacking

of the three most commonly grown HT
crops (Roundup Ready, Liberty Link,
Clearfield) can readily occur in practice.”
They went on to predict that “herbicide
tolerant gene-stacked volunteers of oilseed
rape would be inevitable in practical
agriculture in the UK” and that “separation
distances between non-hybrid crops will only
have a small impact on [multiple resistance]
occurrence unless the isolation distances
are increased to 400 metres or more.”9

SEEDS OF DOUBT 25

“GMOs can play havoc with speciality commodities
because of pollination drift and contamination
as well as contamination of the seed supply …
This raises the question of whether conventional
commodities and GMOs can realistically co-exist.”
Dan McGuire, policy chairman,
American Corn Growers Association, 20021

7

Contamination
The single greatest problem that GMOs
have caused in North America is the
widespread contamination of the
agricultural and food sector. It has
happened within a few years of the
commercialisation of GM crops and has
occurred at all levels of the food chain,
from seed and crop production to food
manufacturing.
This contamination has had many
serious economic and legal consequences,
and has been the most significant problem
for farmers. GM contamination has caused
many farmers to change their minds about
GM crops.
Contamination has had a massive
impact on farmers who are trying to
avoid genetically engineered crops.
Where GM crops have been
commercialised, contamination means
GM-free seed stocks are now difficult
to purchase and supplying GM-free and
organic markets has become an economic
risk as well as an agricultural challenge.
In many areas, seed companies and
organic farmers have been forced to
stop growing certain crops.
Contamination has also impacted
on the industry at large by disrupting
food processing and undermining the
trading of commodities. Contamination
has also led to many wider problems
affecting farmers’ independence,
agricultural markets, farm prices
and legal liabilities.
There are three main areas where
contamination occurs:
• Seed production
• Crop production
• Commodity trading and food processing.

7.1 Seed contamination
“When a genetically engineered (GE) variety
is introduced in a region, it makes it extremely
difficult to grow a certified organic crop of the
same species because of seed stock contamination,
seed movement and pollen drift. Canola is the
Saskatchewan example; elsewhere it is corn
and soybeans.”
Presentation by Saskatchewan Organic
Directorate to the Canadian House of
Commons, 20022
The contamination of North American
seed resources has become a serious
nationwide problem. It has affected those
trying to produce GM-free seed and crops,
and even the companies trying to produce
GM seed. It has particularly affected
organic farmers.
The US organic certifier Farm Verified
Organic has stated that GM contamination
of maize, oilseed rape and soya is now so
pervasive that they believe it is no longer
possible for farmers in North America to
source GM-free seed.3 The Canadian Seed
Trade Association believes that all non-GM
varieties of crops, where GM varieties are
available, are contaminated with an average
of one per cent GM seed.4
Due to the difficulties in obtaining seed,
organic and GM-free production of soya,
maize and rape has become very difficult
in many areas. The problem is particularly
acute in Canada, where contamination is
so widespread in the rape sector that most
organic farmers have had to give up growing
it altogether. In a submission to the courts
in January 2002, a group of organic
farmers from Saskatchewan stated, “The
contamination has reached a level such

26 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Testing methods
• ELISA (enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay)
or ‘strip-test’- the most
rapid test available,
taking just five minutes.
However, each test kit
can only test for one
GM ‘event’. This test
is used by farmers
and at specialist grain
elevators
• Herbicide bioassays
– these detect the
presence of herbicide
tolerant traits; they
cost $20–$30 and
take up to a week as
seedlings have to be
grown and tested
• PCR (polymerase chain
reaction) – the most
accurate and expensive
test, and the only
one which can indicate
the percentage of
GM material present;
it takes up to three
days and costs $300
a sample.

that very few, if any, pedigreed seed growers
in Saskatchewan will warrant their canola
seed to be GMO-free”9 Ian Cushon, an
organic farmer, in Oxbow, Saskatchewan
said, “We don’t grow canola … there were
organic farmers growing it and most have
dropped it as it is nearly impossible to get
clean seed.”10
Seed contamination is also a concern for
the maintenance of crop genetic resources.
The Northern Plains Sustainable Agriculture
Society (NPSAS), for example, is disturbed
that the genetic status of ‘foundation
seedstocks’ has become compromised.
Foundation seedstock programmes are
designed to maintain, increase and
distribute genetically pure seed of
established and new cultivars. But in
March 2001 the NPSAS found that the
North Dakota State University, one of the
participants in the programme, was running
Roundup Ready wheat trials next to its
seedstock plots. The University responded
that “There can be no guarantee that GMO
DNA has not been introduced [into the
seedstock plants].”11
Even Monsanto has admitted that
complete genetic purity is now unattainable.
According to spokesperson Trish Jordan
“zero per cent – that’s impossible.” She gave
the reason as “the sophistication of seed
testing methods now. You can get down
to 0.1 per cent of something.”12
As seed is the starting point of the whole
food chain, contamination at this stage is
particularly undesirable. Moreover, official
standards for commercial seed production
have always required very high levels of
genetic purity in order to ensure that a
farmer’s seed supplies are not contaminated
with other varieties. GM contamination
should not be an exception. Foundation
seeds, for example, are grown directly from
breeders’ seed and should be in their purest
form. In Canada, the seed standard for
foundation stock of oilseed rape allows no
more than 0.1 per cent contamination by
other varieties. However, due to the rate of
gene flow from commercial GM crops, seed
breeders are now having to accept that it
may be impossible to continue producing
hybrid seed varieties in Canada that meet
the seed standards.13

How seed becomes contaminated

During the breeding and production of
seed, GM contamination can occur by gene
transfer, accidental seed mixing or the use
of soiled machinery. Gene transfer occurs

Advanta oilseed rape
In May 2000, it was discovered that a large
quantity of Canadian non-GM rapeseed
which had been exported to Europe was
contaminated with a transgene that was
unapproved in Europe (GT-73, from
Monsanto’s Quest rape). This led to the
destruction of thousands of acres of rape
and compensation payments by the seed
company Advanta to the farmers involved.5
The inquiry set up by the Canadian
government to look into the incident reported
on 15 February 2002. It found that though
the seeds had been grown over 800 metres
from any other GM crops, in accordance with
Canadian regulations, three-quarters of the
final seeds lots had been contaminated,5 at
levels of up to 2.6 per cent.
The inquiry did not decide on the cause
of the contamination. Advanta, however, was
convinced that it was due to cross-pollination
and after the incident the company moved
its commercial seed production from western
Canada to New Zealand, eastern Canada and
Montana, to ensure GM-free purity of their
future seed supplies.6

Monsanto’s GM Quest rapeseed
In May 2001, Monsanto discovered GM
contamination of their GM variety, Roundup
Ready Quest oilseed rape. This rape contains
the GT-73 gene, but they found it also
contained GT-200, another Roundup
resistance gene developed by Monsanto
but not approved for release.7
Around 3,000 farmers had already
bought the seed when they found out and
the discovery resulted in an immediate recall
of the bags purchased. At the time Monsanto
said the incident was evidence that their
quality control system worked. A year later,
however, it said it was concerned that
contaminated seed could turn up in the
food chain and announced that it was
trying to get GT-200 licensed so that it
would not disrupt trade.8
According to the Western Producer
newspaper when the discovery was made
“By demonstrating its gene control system
is susceptible to leaks, Monsanto threatens
to scare away Canada’s major canola buyers,
just as StarLink, developed by Aventis, scared
buyers from American corn products.”7

C O N TA M I N AT I O N 2 7

7.1 Key points
★ North American soya,
maize and rape seed
resources have become
almost completely
contaminated with
GMOs
★ Contamination of
seeds with unapproved
transgenes has caused
costly recalls of nonGM and GM seed
★ Farmers wishing
to grow organic or
‘identity preserved’
crops are having
to make special
sourcing and testing
arrangements for
their seed
★ Most organic farmers
in Saskatchewan, the
main organic farming
province in Canada,
have had to stop
growing oilseed rape as
it is almost impossible
to find GM-free seed
★ Seed contamination
results from crosspollination, accidental
seed mixing and
contaminated
machinery.

by cross-pollination: pollen can be
transported over very large distances in
any direction by wind or insects. Bees, for
instance, regularly fly up to three miles.
Cross-pollination can therefore readily
occur when new seed varieties are bred
and tested in fields or during the
multiplication process to build up the
seed stocks. While the use of separation
distances reduces the risks, they are
never large enough in North America to
guarantee zero contamination at the end.
The machinery used for harvesting also
allows the possibility of contamination.
If the combine has harvested GM seed in
the past, then unless there is thorough
cleaning, it is not possible to guarantee
zero contamination.14
Because of the level of seed
contamination, organic or IP farmers who
succeed in finding a GM-free seed source
are being advised to obtain statements from
the seed companies declaring the seed to be
GM-free. Once the seeds arrive, the farmers
are also advised to test them for all potential
transgenes. Home test-kits are available, but
most are ‘strip-tests’ which only indicate the
presence of a specific GM trait, so several
tests need to be done on each seed lot.
But even this does not guarantee zero GM
contamination, as the only traits that can
be tested for are those for which test kits
have been released by the biotechnology
companies.
In 1997, the Canadian seed company
Limagrain was producing RR rape that was
found to contain the wrong gene, requiring
the seed to be recalled from the market.
Limagrain did not have the ability to test
for the genes, as Gary Bauman, sales and
marketing manager explained: “The
apparent contamination, discovered by
Monsanto, is something only they are able
to detect. We are not even allowed to try to
investigate how to look at and discover this
gene within our own varieties.”15

7.2 Crop contamination
Farmers across North America are facing
major difficulties keeping their growing
crops free from contamination. In the
main GM crop growing areas, non-GM
farmers have their business choices to a large
extent controlled by what their neighbours
are growing. Even when they have obtained
GM-free seed, organic farmers who try to
grow organic crops for which there are GM
varieties are having to go to great lengths

to avoid contamination. Farmers whose
crops have become contaminated have
lost money, and many organic farmers
have given up trying to grow certain crops.
In Canada, contamination of the oilseed
rape crop has reached such a level that
most organic farmers in Saskatchewan,
the province with the most organic farming,
have given up growing rape. They have
taken their complaint to court (see chapter
11, ‘legal issues’). In a statement they said:
“Few, if any, grain farmers in Saskatchewan
could warrant their canola crop, even if
planted with GMO-free seeds, to be free
from GMO contamination.”22
In the US, the situation is not quite so
severe as in Canada, as GM oilseed rape
has not been widely introduced. However,
contamination still seems to be widespread.
This is indicated by the levels picked up by
the specialist organic and IP grain elevators,
which are supplied by those farmers who
are trying to produce GM-free. The grain
elevators are where seed is first taken from
farms; the specialist ones test their deliveries
regularly for contamination. SK Foods
International is one such specialist elevator,
operating at Fargo, North Dakota. The level
of contamination in the area is high enough
for the company to have to test every
delivery. Around five per cent of loads have
to be turned away due to GM contamination.
Crop production manager Derek Crompton
is concerned about the future: “It will be
almost impossible to get 100 per cent
GM-free corn and when they introduce
GM wheat … it doesn’t take a rocket scientist
to realise that pollen travels.”23
Earthwise at Moorhead, Minnesota, is
another specialist organic and IP elevator,
established in 2000. At busy times they
handle up to 23,000 bushels a week. Before
farmers are allowed to deposit their crops,
the load is tested. Currently about one in
every fifty loads, two per cent, is found to
be contaminated. The contaminated loads
are turned away.24
While the ultimate controls on GM
contamination of organic produce are
through the marketplace, the organic
certifiers are limiting the risks in the
organic farming system by operating a
‘systems based’ approach to contamination
through their certification process. This
means that the farmers are required to
follow specific practices to reduce the risk
of contamination, as opposed to the use
of purity standards for their produce.
The details of the approaches vary from
certifier to certifier. In addition, during
their inspections, some (continued p 32)

28 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Tom and Gail Wiley
The Wiley family has farmed around
Montpelier, North Dakota, for over 100 years.
Tom and Gail still run it very much as a family
farm, working with their son Paul. Of the
3,000 acres, approximately 1,000 are given
over to soya each year. GMOs were offered as
a way to achieve ‘no-till’ farming but Tom said
“I have never been sold on no-till. Tried it but
didn’t get good results. I am a conventional
non-GMO farmer. I have not seen any reason
to go the GMO route. Anyway, the system
they touted seemed ‘too good to be true’
– and that is enough to make anyone
suspicious.”
But Tom’s desire to produce non-GM
soya was taken out of his control. In 2000,
he landed a good contract for 15,000 bushels
of food grade soya for Japan. This required
him to “jump through loads of hoops –
everything had to be the right size, colour
and protein content.” Tom was just about to
deliver on the contract when he was told that
there was a problem. The agent had found
1.37 per cent contamination with GM
material. The test was repeated and found
to be correct. He lost the contract, and with
it around $10,000.
This all happened as Tom and Gail were
taking their concerns about the potential
damage the introduction of GM wheat could
have on the state’s economy to the North
Dakota state legislature. They were arguing
that, as wheat was the state’s largest crop,
it would be irresponsible to endanger the
sector without further testing. They lost
their case, found that their own soya was
contaminated, and became committed
anti-GM campaigners.16

C O N TA M I N AT I O N 2 9

Marc Loiselle

Sue and Mark Fitzgerald

Marc Loiselle, from Vonda,
Saskatchewan, describes
himself as the “steward
of an intergenerational
family farm” and has
been farming organically
for 17 years. He grows
hard red spring wheat,
barley, oats, flax, peas,
alfalfa and clover.
He received inquiries
from an Asian buyer
for organic oilseed rape
offering C$18/bushel
compared to the
conventional rate of
around C$7/bushel.
But he knew it would
be impossible to keep
his crop free from GM
contamination during the
growing season because
of the nearby GM oilseed
rape fields.
If he had taken up
the contract, Marc would
have sown 130 acres to
canola. He estimates
that with the drought
conditions at the time he
would have had a yield of
around 12 bushels/acre.
This would have meant
an income of some
C$28,080. In the end he
had to plant barley, which
earned him C$4,160
some C$23,920 less.17
Marc is now hoping
his losses will be
compensated through
a class action by the
Saskatchewan Organic
Directorate (see section
11.2).

The Fitzgeralds farm 1,400 acres of maize and
bean (soya and edible) in rotation in Hancock,
western Minnesota. They converted to organic
farming in 1998.
Last year one of their 100 acre fields of
maize had a neighbour’s crop of Bt maize to its
east. To reduce the risk of contamination, they
had planted hedges and bought maize seed
guaranteed to be free of GM contamination.
Sue and Mark started to harvest from the west,
and when they got to the mid-point of the field,
they started testing each 200 bushel load with
strip-tests before transferring it to the silos.
“When we got to 180 feet of the border, we
began to pick up contamination,” explained
Sue. “The contamination was all along the side
up against the neighbours Bt maize field. We
lost around 1,000 bushels from the total field

harvest of 12,000 bushels.” They sent
the contaminated maize straight off to
the elevator as a non-organic crop.
This loss of around eight per cent of
the organic crop cost the Fitzgeralds’ almost
$2,000. They were getting $4/bushel for the
organic crop, and only $2/bushel for the
contaminated grain.
According to Susan, it could have been much
worse. “If there had been a Bt crop to the north
west, it might have taken out the entire crop,
as that is where prevailing wind comes from.
“All we can do is try and run our rotation
with our neighbours, so if they grow corn, we
grow beans. But they also need to put up a
refuge – they sign a statement committing to
putting one in, but farmers often say that they
don’t know what they have signed.”18

30 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Roger and Amy Lansink
Roger and Amy Lansink farm nearly 500 acres in
Iowa. They are certified organic and grow maize,
soya, barley, oats, alfalfa, rye and some squash.
They also raise cattle, sheep and chickens.
In spring 2001 they planted organic soya seed.
Roger was very careful: before ordering the seed
he paid for a test and received a certificate stating
that there was zero per cent GM content. He had
a sample sent to him which he tested and found
to be clear of contamination, so he ordered his
seed. When this arrived he tested it and again
found that it was clear. Just as he was about
to plant the seed he noticed some of the beans
looked a little different so he had them tested
for a fourth time. They were fine as well.

In autumn 2001, Roger and Amy sent their
harvest to Clarkson Grain (Illinois), with whom
he had a contract to supply. But they told him
that their testing had found GM contamination.
They are now waiting for confirmation of this
– if it is true they could lose at least $40,000
($10.50 contracted price per bushel for
organic, vs. $3.85 as the conventional price
at the elevator).19
“The buyers are now looking for a feed
market that doesn't do the GMO testing. They
are starting to think that they got a bunch of
bad tests, or they didn’t quite do them right,
as they have had a lot of soybeans come up
GMO positive last fall.”20

C O N TA M I N AT I O N 3 1

Earthwise

David Vetter – The Grain Place

A Minnesota-based
specialist organic and IP
elevator, handling up to
23,000 bushels a week.
Before farmers are
allowed to deposit their
crops, the load is tested.
Currently about one in
every fifty loads, two
per cent, is found to
be contaminated. The
contaminated loads
are turned away.

David Vetter (above) has been running his 280
acre farm in Marquette, Nebraska as organic
since 1977. In 1998 he became aware of
neighbours growing GM crops, so he began
a process of testing to ensure the integrity of
his maize. In the first two years there was no
evidence of any contamination. But in 2000
he picked up a small amount, less than 0.1 per
cent. Again in 2001, there was a low level of
GM presence.
He has not taken the products off the
market yet; he is letting his customers know
what the situation is and letting them decide
whether to continue to purchase from him.
This contamination is particularly hard for
David to deal with as over the last 10 years he
has been developing an open pollinated line of
maize that is specifically designed for the local
climate, soil and his processing needs;
maximum yield is not the priority.
“I don’t want to argue with my neighbours
over the choice of what they plant, but if it
impacts on my ability to farm, it becomes an
issue.” But his real anger is directed towards
the companies developing GM technology.
“They want to claim the benefits of ownership
without accepting the responsibilities.”
“Companies are not willing to guarantee
non-GMO seed stocks to be 100 per cent
non-GMO. For the future I have a lot more
concern. The seed industry is pushing for higher
levels of contamination to be called non-GM.
Currently it is three per cent, industry are
pushing for five percent. This is an admission
that they cannot manage their own products.”
David is currently considering legal action.21

32 SEEDS OF DOUBT

7.2 Key points
★ Farmers across North
America are facing
severe difficulties
keeping non-GM
crops free from GM
contamination
★ Wind, insects, floods
and machinery are
spreading seed and
pollen considerable
distances; industry
separation distances
between GM and
non-GM crops are
inadequate
★ Many organic and
non-organic GM-free
farmers have lost sales
or received lower
prices because of
contamination at a
potential cost of over
$90 million annually
★ Most organic farmers
in Saskatchewan have
had to stop growing
oilseed rape completely
★ To avoid contamination,
organic farmers are
having to incur costs
by planting hedges,
considering the
prevailing winds,
juggling their planting
times and crop
rotations with their
neighbours, taking
care with hired
machinery, and
testing their harvests
★ The specialist elevators
which receive organic
or IP crops from the
farms are rejecting
one in 20 to one in
50 deliveries because
of contamination.

(from p 27) certifiers inspect all the
boundaries of the farm and record the
existence of GM crops and assess the risks;
they may take crop samples for testing.
If contamination is found, the certifier
may decertify the product and agree
further farm management changes,
or if it is a case of mismanagement or
unavoidable contamination, the whole farm
may be decertified. However, the levels of
background contamination are such that
the whole organic sector feels that it is
losing the ability to control contamination.25
The Union of Concerned Scientists has
estimated that, based on a $0.50/bushel
organic price premium and an average
organic maize harvest of 120 bushels,
contamination could mean a potential lost
income of $90 million annually for organic
maize growers. This does not take into
account the growth of the organic market.26
Organic farmers are now fearing the
potential introduction of GM-wheat and
the loss of their ability to produce wheat,
their most important crop.

The many causes of crop contamination

The rates of gene flow by pollen transfer
from GM oilseed rape and maize to other
crops have been investigated by the
European Environment Agency. It found
that GM oilseed rape is a high-risk crop
for crop-to-crop gene flow and GM maize
is a medium to high-risk crop.27
However, farmers in North America have
found that there are many ways by which
crop contamination can occur. As well as
through airborne or insect mediated pollen,
GM contamination can arrive from spillage
of seed along the road. Strong winds can
also shift seeds considerable distances, and,
according to one US farmer, the ability of
flood waters to wash seed and seedlings from
one field to another is often overlooked.28
If a non-GM crop is planted in a field that
previously contained a GM variety, then
contamination through volunteers is
inevitable. Some farmers consider that the
most frequent cause of contamination comes
from equipment, such as rented combines.29

Strategies for minimising contamination

The impression is that GM farmers do
not seem to be taking many measures to
prevent contamination of neighbouring
farms. There are government and industry
guidelines, such as the ones for setting up

insect resistance refuges which can double
as separation distances. However, these
do not appear to have been regularly
communicated to GM farmers or enforced.
They would also probably not be large
enough to prevent contamination, only
reduce it. It appears that the prevention of
contamination has therefore fallen mainly
on those who are not growing GM crops.
Organic farmers in particular have had to
alter their practices significantly to reduce
the chances of contamination.
This involves planning, investment and
extra work. Organic farmers are setting
up physical barriers, such as planting
hedgerows, along with trying to grow
susceptible crops as far from neighbouring
GM fields as possible. An awareness of the
prevailing wind direction is helpful. Perhaps
most important is for farmers to develop
good relationships with the neighbouring
farmers and learn what they are going to
plant when. It is then possible to plant a
little later, so that, hopefully, flowering
times do not coincide. Many juggle their
whole crop rotations to accommodate the
timing of the nearby GM crops.30 In addition,
they have to take care to only use machinery
dedicated for organic crops. Testing the
harvest is the final assurance. Even with
this, however, farmers need to consider
carefully before committing themselves
to a GM-free supply contract.31 All of these
steps will usually involve increased costs for
organic farmers.

7.3 Commodity and
food contamination
If you have the only bin load of non-GM in the
county then it is bound to get contaminated as
it travels with all the GM soya.
Gale Lush, Nebraska farmer 38
The StarLink fiasco (see facing page)
highlighted how vulnerable the whole food
manufacturing and commodity system is to
GM contamination. Only a tiny amount of
unapproved GM maize was able to disrupt
the country’s entire grain supply and cause
economic, health and legal problems.
Contamination has also meant the loss
of many buyers of North American farm
produce as those wanting GM-free supplies
cannot be provided for.
Although 40 per cent of the Canadian
oilseed rape crop is non-GM, the impact of
contamination from GM crop means that

C O N TA M I N AT I O N 3 3

Apache organic
tortilla chips
In 1998, cross-pollination
from Bt maize was
suspected of
contaminating an
organic farm in Texas.
But the contamination
was not discovered
until the maize had been
processed and shipped to
Europe as organic tortilla
chips under the brand
name Apache. By then
the company, Terra Prima,
had to recall 87,000 bags.
The event cost the small
company in excess of
$150,000.39

this 40 per cent cannot be sold as GM-free.40
Randy Jones of America Health and
Nutrition Inc. explained “No one wants
to buy Canadian canola as you cannot
guarantee GMO-free. No one wants it
because of the reputation.” 41 Similarly,
although 75 per cent of US maize is
non-GM, the Organic Federation of
Australia has stated that organic maize
imported from North America can no
longer be guaranteed free from GM
contamination.42 As a consequence, farmers
are being prevented from accessing the
premiums for non-GM crops and the
market for their produce has suffered.
The lack of segregation has meant that
every stage post-farm gate – transport,
storage and milling – have all compounded
the problems of seed-level and farm-level
contamination through ‘co-mingling.’ If
a crop that turned out to be contaminated
with an unapproved GM gene entered the
general system, then the crops from all the
other farms which were handled together
also become tainted in the market. Similarly,
though there have been many farmers
producing non-GM crops and many buyers
for them, there was no means of maintaining
the integrity of the non-GM crop to the
marketplace.

Growth of segregation and testing

The pressure on the commodity markets
and the repercussions of the StarLink fiasco,
together with pressure from consumers
and importers, have meant that systems
are now being expanded to segregate GM
from non-GM crops by the industry and
government. The number of maize and soya
elevators in the Midwestern US states that
require segregation, either on delivery or
on farm, had risen to over 50 per cent by
autumn 2001, from under 10 per cent
in autumn 1999, as revealed by a survey
of 1,149 elevators by the American Corn
Growers Association. In addition, almost
20 per cent are offering price premiums
for non-GM grain.43 The US government
is also investing in the development and
certification of GM contamination testing
methods and kits.
A measure of control will have been
reintroduced to the situation, but it remains
to be seen whether the measures will be
sufficient. Some identity preservation on
the basis of quality characteristics and
special varieties has been in existence in
the US for years, but it is not clear whether
the systems will be sufficient for non-GM

StarLink Bt maize
There has already been one major and
apparently harmful case of GM food
contamination, the StarLink Bt maize case.
In September 2000, it was discovered that
taco shells on sale contained the Cry9C
protein, indicating the presence of StarLink
maize. The FDA had only approved this GM
maize for animal feed, not for food, due
to concerns over the novel protein being a
potential allergen. The contamination was not
uncovered by the food industry or regulators,
but the environmental organisation Friends
of the Earth.
Only about one per cent of the 2000 US
maize harvest, 124 million bushels of maize,
was StarLink. However, this became mixed
with, and contaminated, nearly half the
national maize supply that year. The
discovery resulted in an expensive recall
and compensation operation that exposed
the food industry to the practical difficulties
of GM crops. Kraft Foods, the company that
produced the taco shells, recalled them and
all similar products. In total eventually nearly
300 food products were recalled. This caused
major disruption to the domestic and export
market.32
The US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
and Aventis, the company that developed
StarLink maize, agreed to a buy-back
programme, in which farmers were offered
25 cents a bushel over the market price by
the company, in an attempt to divert the
contaminated maize into the animal feed
and non-food markets.32 The USDA also
bought back seed maize from seed companies,
at an estimated cost of $13 million.33
Meanwhile, over 50 Americans claimed to
have suffered allergic reactions to the maize,
which “varied from just abdominal pain and
diarrhoea, skin rashes to some patients, a very
small group, having very severe life threatening
reactions” according to Dr Marc Rothenberg,
allergy chief at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital
and a government adviser on the StarLink
case.34 After a full investigation, the
independent scientific advisory committee
on the case advised the government that
there was a “medium probability” that
the maize could cause allergic reactions.35
The total cost to Aventis so far is estimated
to be in the region of $1 billion, and the legal
consequences are still continuing.36 Aventis has
since abandoned its US production of StarLink
and sold its crop science division to Bayer in
October 2001.37

34 SEEDS OF DOUBT

7.3 Key points
★ GM contamination
of the food and
commodity systems has
caused major domestic
and international trade
problems
★ Without segregation
in the handling and
distribution systems,
just one per cent of
unapproved GM maize
contaminated nearly
half the national maize
supply in September
2000
★ The StarLink incident
was a possible cause
of many allergic
reactions and cost
Aventis an estimated
$1 billion and the US
government at least
$13 million
★ The lack of segregation
has meant that most
Canadian rape and
US maize commodity
supplies cannot be
sold as non-GM
abroad, though only
part is actually GM
★ As a result, market
prices have fallen
and few non-GM
farmers can access the
international premium
non-GM markets
★ Over 50 per cent of
US elevators are now
requiring GM crops to
be segregated from
non-GM crops; the
impact of this has
yet to be seen.

grain to have access to the GM-free markets.
The key question for the future, according
to the American Corn Growers Association,
is whether the non-GM crops will be
contaminated beyond the threshold levels
used by foreign markets and governments.44
The extra costs of segregation and testing
are having to be borne by the whole
industry.

SEEDS OF DOUBT 35

“Genetically engineered crops represent a huge
and uncontrolled experiment whose outcome
is inherently unpredictable.”
Dr Barry Commoner, biologist,
City University of New York, 20021

8

Unpredicted effects
With the normal farming uncertainties of
the weather and markets, it is important
that the characteristics of any crop variety
are stable and that there are not going
to be completely unpredictable effects.
The process of genetically engineering
crop plants is described publicly by the
biotechnology industry as “deliberate”
and “precise”, in a way that suggests it
is more controlled and predictable then
conventional breeding methods.2 The
official process of approving new GM
varieties also assumes that any biological
changes to the plants are limited. However,
some farmers in America have reported
experiences of unexpected and occasionally
unwelcome effects.

GM feed and livestock

The main use of the GM crops which have
been commercialised in North America so
far is for animal feed. Maize, oilseed rape
and soya are basic components of the
intensive meat production industry, so
the effect on livestock of these crops is
very important. However no, or almost
no, animal feeding trials with pigs, cattle
or other livestock were carried out before
the crops went into commercial production.
This is surprising considering the large scale
on which these novel crops were going to
be used – it might have been expected
that extensive, long-term trials would have
been carried out. It therefore seems worth
highlighting any consistent reports of
unexpected effects from farmers since GM
crops were introduced. The problem of the
pig breeders in Iowa is the most dramatic
consequence to have surfaced so far (see
panel overleaf). In addition, several farmers
have reported their livestock showing a
marked preference for non-GM feed:

• “If a field contained GM and non-GM corn,
cattle would always eat the non-GM first.”
Gale Lush, Nebraska 3
• “A neighbour had been growing Pioneer
Bt-corn. When the cattle were turned out
onto the stalks they just wouldn’t eat them.”
Gary Smith, Terry, Montana 4
• “I saw an advert from a farmer who was
looking for non-Bt corn, as he was getting
lower milk yields from the cattle that were
eating Bt corn.”
Tom Wiley, North Dakota 5
• “A captive elk escaped and took up residence
in our crops of organic corn and soya. It had
total access to the neighbouring fields of GM
crops, but never went into them.”
Susan & Mark Fitzgerald,
western Minnesota 6
• “While my cows show a preference for openpollinated corn over the hybrid varieties,
they both beat Bt-corn hands down.”
Tim Eisenbeis, South Dakota 7
• “A student placed two bales of corn in a
rodent infested barn. One was Roundup Ready
and the other was conventional. Apparently
the rodents would not touch the Roundup
Ready crop.”
Roger Lansink, Iowa 8
An article in 1999 also catalogued several
cases of problems with GM feed in the
Midwest:
• Cattle refused to graze Bt-maize stubble
• Pigs went off feed when GM grains were
included in the ration
• Cattle stopped eating when the farmer
switched to GM silage
• Rate of weight gain in cattle dropped
when switched to GM feed
• Cattle broke through a fence and
walked through RR-maize to mow down
a non-GM hybrid, leaving the RR-maize
untouched.9

36 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Iowa pig breeders
In Iowa, pig breeders believe they have
encountered a serious problem with Bt maize,
with 17 producers reporting a sharp decline
in pig farrowing (conception) rates following
the use of Bt maize in their pig feed.
Jerry Rosman experienced an 80 per cent fall
in his farrowing rate after using Bt maize and
four of his neighbours had the same problem.
In each case the animals were exhibiting
pseudo-pregnancies. Outwardly the pigs had
all the signs of being pregnant but after two
to four months the signs disappeared. The
breeders had different management styles,
breeding methods and swine genetics, but
they were all feeding Bt maize.
Jerry did everything he could to find out
the cause: he tested for diseases, examined
his nutritional programme, verified his
insemination rates and sent samples of the
maize away to several laboratories. In total he
spent over $6000. Laboratory tests eventually
revealed that the Bt maize from all five farms
had high levels of fusarium mold, suggesting
the presence of mycotoxins that can cause
pseudo-pregnancies. But this could not be
confirmed as the cause as the one mycotoxin
which is known to cause this problem was
absent and other types have not yet been
identified by pathologists and cannot be
detected.
“We’re working with a problem no one has
ever heard of before” said Jerry. One of the
operations has stopped feeding Bt maize, and
its farrowing rates have returned to normal.
Jerry reported the problem to the state
farming journal, the Iowa Farm Bureau
Spokesman, in May 2002. Within 10 days,
another 12 pig producers from various parts of
Iowa contacted him with the same problem.2

The lack of segregation of GM from
non-GM grain is likely to have masked
other problems. According to Jerry Rosman,
most of those who reported the pig breeding
problems in Iowa were smaller producers
who were growing all their own feed,
generally all of the same variety. The few
who were using bought-in feed and reported
problems, said they had noticed fluctuating
farrowing rates as they went through
successive deliveries of feed.10 Most
livestock production in the US involves
large, intensive ‘feed lots’ and bought-in
feed. With only a quarter of the maize in
the system being GM, the larger producers
would not experience a problem consistently
in the way smaller farmers would.
These negative experiences of some
individual farmers do not add up to proof
that there is a general problem with all GM
feed. But, it is clear that several farmers
(and their animals) have noticed a
substantial difference between some
GM and non-GM feed. Furthermore,
there may be problems that have not
been identified in the sector at large.

Unpredicted effects in GM plants

“In the past I would always cut the soy first
as it would collapse under the weight of the
beans. But now the stems are so tough they
wear out the combine.”
Nebraska farmer, Gale Lush, found that
the RR soya he planted were tougher
than the conventional variety.3
The commercialisation of GM crops has
uncovered a few unexpected problems
of plant structure and health. The
unexpectedly high levels of fusarium in
the Iowan Bt maize has yet to be explained.
Several unexpected problems have been
reported with RR soya, of which at least two
are definitely related to the GM character
of the plants.
University of Georgia scientists were
alerted by farmers in the southern US
states to unexpected soya crop losses and
reports of RR soya plants splitting in hot
temperatures. On investigation, the scientists
found that RR soya plants are producing up
to 20 per cent more lignin than other soya
plants. This makes the stems more brittle,
causing stunting and splitting at a far higher
rate than normal soya in hot weather and
leading to crop losses of up to 40 per cent.
The researchers concluded that the inserted
gene that gave resistance to glyphosate was
affecting a major metabolic pathway in the

UNPREDICTED EFFECTS 37

plant which had the side effect of sending
lignin production into overdrive.11
As reported in chapter 4, RR soya is
unexpectedly yielding 10 per cent less than
equivalent non-GM varieties. It also seems to
be susceptible to certain pests and diseases,
and this is believed to be due to the
additional genetic material suppressing the
plants’ stress responses. This might possibly
explain why farm advisers at the University
of Missouri reported inexplicably high levels
of pest attack on the soya crop in 2001. “I
don’t know what it was this year, but we saw
insects eating soybeans that we’ve never seen
before.” 12 The reason given was weather, but
it could have been an abnormal response
of the RR soya to the weather conditions.
Another unexpected problem that could
again be due to the use of GM varieties was
the poor viability of the 2001 US soya seed
supplies. Seed companies reported finding
it hard to meet seed germination standards.
Germination targets are usually around
95 per cent, yet these were nearer 80 per
cent, meaning that more seed needed to
be applied per acre. The soyabeans also
contained more green seed than usual,
indicating that many plants had died
prematurely. As with the soya stem
problems, this was also linked to hot
weather by the University of Missouri.13

Inadequate assessment prior to
commercialisation

“There is a profound difference between the
unintended effects from traditional breeding
and genetic engineering.”
Dr Louis Pribyl, scientific adviser to the
FDA, 1992 14
Government scientific advisers in the US and
Canada have opposed their governments’
assessment processes for the approval of
GMOs, considering them unscientific. One
of their particular concerns was the potential
for unpredictable side effects to occur from
the genetic engineering process, which
would not be identified by the assessment
procedures being used. In a review in
February 2001, the Royal Society of Canada
called the approvals regime “scientifically
unjustifiable.” 15 In 1992, a majority of the US
FDA’s scientific advisers did not support the
government’s proposed assessment regime
for GMOs, contrary to the public statements
made by the FDA. They believed that animal
feeding trials would be needed to pick up
undesirable side effects. The assessment
procedures were adopted anyway.16

The procedures for the assessment of side
effects from genetic engineering are based
on an analysis of the levels of a limited list of
chemicals in the GMO, such as key nutrients
and toxins. If the levels of these are similar
to those in the equivalent non-GM plants,
the GMO as a whole can be deemed
“substantially equivalent” to non-GM plants
and few further safety trials, such as animal
feeding trials, are required. This is especially
so in the US. As a consequence, no or almost
no animal feeding trials were carried out
before GM crops were put on the market.
However, unlike the public descriptions
of genetic engineering as “precise”, the
engineering of a GMO has a large random
component to the process, so unpredictable
side effects are expected. The process
involves the foreign gene randomly inserting
itself in the plant’s natural genetic material,
disrupting the existing genes at the point of
insertion. Genetic engineers can in theory
insert genes in a particular place but in
practice this is not done; even if it were
there is usually no suitable position which
would not be disruptive. The effects of the
process are that some of the characteristics
and metabolic processes of the plant are
likely to be randomly altered. In addition,
the gene is not inserted on its own, but as
part of a ‘construct’ with other genes,
including a viral promoter gene to activate
the functional gene. However, the nature
of the promoter means that the inserted
genes are liable to be unstable and move
out again. Overall, GM plants are therefore
generally highly unstable and variable in
the functioning of the foreign gene from
one generation to the next, as well as being
expected to display unintended effects.
Behind the scenes, the biotechnology
industry is well aware that the current
techniques cause disruption of the plant’s
genetic material: “The phenomenon of
rearrangements at the point of genetic
insertion is widely recognised” said
Marcia Vincent, technical communications
manager, Monsanto, August 2001.17 “Plant
biotechnology … processes cause severe
changes to cell metabolism by disrupting
existing architectures or by activating
defence mechanisms deigned to cope
with entirely different assaults” according
to two biotechnology consultants.18
Instability is also a widely encountered
problem in the industry. For example,
in a survey of at least thirty companies
developing GM crops, all had observed
some instability of the transgene.19
Even when the biotechnology sector
started carrying out animal feeding trials

38 SEEDS OF DOUBT

8. Key points
★ Almost no animal
feeding trials were
carried out before GM
crops were released for
commercial growing,
though their main use
was for animal feed
★ The biotechnology
companies publicly
suggest that genetic
engineering is a precise
and controlled
technique; however,
several farmers have
reported unexpected
effects
★ Pig breeders in Iowa
have had a major
reduction in breeding
levels since they started
using Bt maize as feed
★ Many farmers have
reported that cattle
show a marked
preference for non-GM
maize if given a choice
★ In certain conditions RR
soya has been found to
be susceptible to pests
and disease and stem
splitting due to lignin
levels being higher
than in non-GM soya
★ Government scientific
advisers in the US
and Canada opposed
their governments’
assessment procedures
for the approval
of GM crops as
unscientific, on the
basis they would not
identify undesirable
side-effects of the
engineering process.

after commercial growing started, they
were not initially of farm animals and were
often not designed to identify unpredictable
effects. For example, they often involved
feeding just the protein product of the
new gene to the animal, and not the whole
GMO. Sometimes too little of the GMO was
fed in the diet; in others negative effects
did occur but were ignored.20 Over the last
couple of years a few feeding trials with farm
animals have been carried out, looking at
aspects such as digestibility and weight gain
and few significant differences have emerged
so far.21
Another reason why side effects on the
plant’s structure or health are not picked
up before commercialisation is because,
according to one of the FDA’s scientific
advisers “many of these effects might not be
seen by the breeder because of the more or
less similar growing conditions in the limited
trials that are performed.”14 Hence, it is only
when the plants are exposed to the different
environmental conditions of widespread
commercial growing and fed to animals
on farms, that changes to their normal
response to environmental stresses and
other side effects may emerge.

SEEDS OF DOUBT 39

“There is no choice. It is so difficult to find
guaranteed non-GM soya, and you end up
with poorer varieties.”
Gale Lush, farmer growing GM soya, Nebraska1

9

Farmer choice
With the introduction of GM crops, farmers
have suffered a severe loss of choice about
how they farm. Many are finding themselves
forced to avoid certain crops or even to grow
GM crops simply because of a lack of choice,
not because of the particular GM attributes
of the GM crops. Farmers who grow GM
crops can then find themselves effectively
‘locked-in’ to growing GM crops.
Farmers are also reporting that the
availability of good non-GM seed varieties
is rapidly disappearing, as good varieties
are increasingly only available in a GM form.
Sharon Rempel, organic crop researcher
from Alberta explained: “It is more
and more difficult to get seed varieties,
catalogues are getting thinner.” And it is not
just the choice in seeds that is evaporating.
“In 1900 there were around 2000 seed
companies in North America, now there
are less than 200.” Sharon is particularly
concerned about control “The hand that
holds the seed controls the food supply.”2
GM contamination has exacerbated this
problem. Seed and crop contamination and
the lack of segregation in the marketplace
has meant that many farmers do not have
the option of supplying the higher value
GM-free or organic markets (in much of
Canada, organic rape production is no

Sharon Rempel
Sharon Rempel, organic
crop researcher from
Alberta explained “It is
more and more difficult
to get seed varieties,
catalogues are getting
thinner.”2

longer an option). Moreover, crop
contamination has introduced the worrying
uncertainty of whether a non-GM farmer
might be accused by a biotechnology
company of growing unlicensed GM crops.
If this happens, and it seems to have
very often, the consequences are expensive
and unpleasant (see chapter 12). Farmers
who are already growing GM crops are
susceptible to the ‘lock-in’ effect of GM
crops – their contracts allow biotechnology
company inspectors access to their farms
and they may be struggling with GM
herbicide resistant volunteers, making
them vulnerable to claims of growing
unlicensed crops. The experience of Troy
Roush (p 42) indicates that if a GM farmer
is accused, and intimidated, he can feel that
growing more, rather than less, GM crops
is the best way to reduce the chances of
the problem continuing.
The problem is that the leading
Midwestern seed companies have been
bought up by the biotechnology companies,
who now only sell the most popular hybrids
of the seed companies genetically
engineered with HT or Bt genes.3 DuPont
and Monsanto are now the two largest seed
companies in the world with combined
sales in excess of $3.5 billion in 2000.4

40 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Gale Lush
Gale Lush farms nearly 3,000 acres with
his father and three brothers near Ragan,
Nebraska. He is growing Roundup Ready
soya but has been looking into identity
preserved soya with a hope of gaining the
reported premiums. “If I could get hold of the
seed and market then I would stop growing
Roundup Ready.”
But he has not found it as easy as he
thought because good non-GM varieties
have become harder to obtain. “There is no
choice,” he explained. “It is so difficult to find
guaranteed non-GM soya, and you end up
with poorer varieties.” This is compounded
by the problems of transport and storage.1

FA R M E R C H O I C E 4 1

Jim Stiegelmeier
Jim Stiegelmeier farms 4,000 acres of organic
land near Selby, South Dakota. Soya, spring
wheat, buckwheat, rye and cattle form the
basis of his enterprise. Until recently his only
involvement with GM crops had been lobbying
against them – helping to draft resolutions for
the state senate and talking about the risks. But
GM crops have now forced him to change the
way he farms. He has had to stop growing
organic maize due to problems finding GM-free
seed, and the worries of pollen drift from GM
maize-growing neighbours. As for soya: “We
will probably just stop growing soya if we get
any contamination issues. We will just move
towards more animal production.”5

42 SEEDS OF DOUBT

9. Key points

Troy Roush

★ Farmers have suffered
a severe loss of choice
about how they farm,
as a result of GM
contamination and
a reduction in choice
of seed
★ Some farmers growing
GM crops have felt
themselves ‘locked-in’
to GM crops because
of the difficulty
obtaining non-GM
seed and accessing
the non-GM markets
★ A farmer who was
accused of growing
unlicensed GM crops,
despite evidence to
the contrary, decided
to start growing GM
crops just to avoid
further accusations
★ Organic farmers are
being forced to avoid
certain crops because
of contamination
★ Many seed companies
have been bought up
by the biotechnology
companies which had
led to a sharp reduction
in the availability of
good non-GM varieties
★ The continued large
area of GM crops may
be as much to do with
the ‘lock-in’ effect of a
lack of choice, than the
attributes of GM crops.

In 1999 Troy Roush and his family grew 492
acres of Roundup Ready soya under licence on
their Indiana farm, alongside 1,328 acres of
conventional soya beans. During harvest time
Monsanto sent investigators to their land who
claim to have sampled 16 fields. They alleged
that 15 of these samples contained Roundup
Ready soybeans.
Troy Roush was startled by this claim. To
start with, the investigators were never seen by
his staff on the land, despite it being the busiest
time of year on the farm. He was also confused
as to how they allegedly found RR soya in his
fields of popcorn. This could be because some
of the fields they sampled were not Roush’s
land. Checking back over his chemical records
he could prove that only two of the fields
sampled were planted with the GM seed. To be
on the safe side, he asked his lawyer to get an
independent review undertaken of his planting
and chemical records. In a sworn deposition the
consultants stated that the Roushes simply did
not purchase enough Roundup seed or herbicide
to account for the claims made by Monsanto.
But in May 2000, Monsanto filed a lawsuit
against the family accusing them of having
illegally grown Monsanto GM soya. They also
sent more investigators to the farm – but this
time the Roushes were ready and shadowed
them, taking similar samples along with Global
Positioning System readings. None of their
samples showed up as positive for RR soya,
yet they had been planted with seed saved
from their previous year’s crop. The crop that
Monsanto claimed to have been a Roundup
Ready crop.
In June 2001 Monsanto’s lawyers sent
a letter to over 900 seed suppliers, farmers
and agricultural extension agents in Indiana,
Michigan and Ohio stating that the company
did not authorise the sale of any of their
products to the Roush family.6 In the legal
battles that have continued, Monsanto have
rescinded this letter. But the damage has been
done. Troy said, “I wouldn't trade $100 million
for the damage they've done to our family’s
reputation.”
The family have spent $150,000 to defend
themselves, but have not been able to get
Monsanto to turn up in court to finish the
business. In the meantime, to prevent the
possibility of a similar accusation being made
again, Troy has taken a radical decision: to
plant every acre of his soya crop to (licensed
and paid for) GM Roundup Ready beans.7

SEEDS OF DOUBT 43

“Farmers are really starting to question the profit
enhancing ability of products that seem to be
shutting them out of markets worldwide.”
Cory Ollikka, president of Canada’s National Farmers
Union calling for a moratorium on GM crops,
December 20001

10

National farm economy

GM crops were meant to have improved
the competitiveness of American farming.
Instead, they have turned out to be a major
burden on the agricultural economy. Not
only have GM crops reduced the average
profitability of farming but they have made
it less market-oriented: as GM crops were
being introduced, so the GM market was
shrinking. As a result, American farming
has become more dependent on state
subsidies.

10.1 International trade
“Biotech corn has already proven to be a market
destructor for US corn farmers.”
Keith Dittrich, maize farmer and president
of the American Corn Growers Association,
January 2002.2
“It seems there are problems with GMO products
in that they cannot be controlled in the field, they
cannot be kept separated in the marketing chain
and there has been inadequate independent
testing of their long-term health effects. I believe
the impact these products are having on our
trading relationships is very troubling.”
Kent Conrad, North Dakota’s senator,
February 2001.3

trade in those sectors, GM and non-GM,
at great cost to the US and Canada.
European markets in particular have
rejected GM crops. Within a few years of
the introduction of GM maize, US maize
exports to Europe almost completely
disappeared, though three-quarters of
US maize was non-GM. From 1996 to 2001,
according to USDA data, the value of US
maize exports to the EU dropped 99.4 per
cent, from $305 million (2.8 million tonnes)
to $1.8 million (6,300 tonnes). In total, the
US lost an estimated $2 billion in trade with
Europe.4 Canadian oilseed rape suffered a
similar fate. Canada is the world’s largest
exporter of oilseed rape.5 GM rape was
introduced in 1996 and just two years
later almost the entire $300–400 million
of annual sales to Europe had vanished.1
The trade for Canadian honey has been
almost completely destroyed due to GM
contamination.6 The EU is also the largest
US market for maize gluten meal (82 per
cent), and US exports to Europe dropped
by a fifth, from 5.5 million tonnes in
1995–96 to 4.4 million tonnes in
2000–01.7
US maize exports to the EU since the
introduction of GM crops (in millions of tonnes) 8
3

The most dramatic result of GM crops
has been the complete collapse of major
export markets. The North American
experience has shown that the market for
GM crops is much more restricted than it
is for non-GM crops; in fact many markets
are almost closed to GM produce. GM
varieties only account for a part of national
production but, without segregation in the
industry, they have handicapped the whole

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

’95/’96 ’96/’97 ’97/’98 ’98/’99 ’99/’00 ’00/’01

44 SEEDS OF DOUBT

10.1 Key points
★ GM crops have turned
out to be a market
failure internationally
and, because of a lack
of segregation, they
have undermined the
total trade in those
commodities
★ Major export markets
have completely
collapsed, including
the entire $300 million
annual US maize
exports to the EU and
the entire $300 million
annual Canadian rape
exports to the EU
★ The US share of the
world soya market has
fallen from 57 per cent
to 46 per cent while
the share of Brazil,
which prohibits GM
soya, has risen from 24
per cent to 30 per cent
★ Almost the entire
European food
market has banned
GM ingredients, and
the US and Asian
markets appear to
be following suit
★ While only four
countries are significant
growers of GM crops,
over 35 countries have
labelling requirements
or other government
restrictions on GM
crops
★ North American farm
prices have fallen as
a result of the market
problems and many US
farming organisations
are now urging farmers
not to plant GM seed
this year.

Asian countries have also rejected North
American imports. After the StarLink maize
fiasco in 2000, Japan and South Korea, the
biggest foreign buyers of US maize, rejected
US maize over contamination concerns.4
US maize exports to Japan dropped 52
million bushels in 2001 (1.3 million
tonnes).2 China has also become reluctant
to accept GM crops. In 2000, the state of
Saskatchewan exported C$123 million of
oilseed rape to China, but new regulations
requiring proof that GMOs are safe has put
this trade in doubt. “As it stands now, we will
not be allowed to ship canola into China”
said Bill Mooney of Pioneer Grain.9 China is
believed to have cancelled about one million
tonnes of maize this year from the US.7
Animal feed is the main market
supporting the remaining trade in GM
crops, but even this large outlet is now
shrinking. In May 2001, the USDA
announced: “Over the last 12 months,
demand for certified biotech-free soybean
meal has grown from near zero to 20–25
per cent of the EU market according to
officials in the compound feed industry.” 1
The US share of the world soya market has
now fallen from 57 per cent to 46 per cent.10
The importing countries have turned
elsewhere for GM-free supplies. Europe is
still importing very large quantities of maize
but non-GM producing countries such as
Brazil and Hungary have replaced US
suppliers.7 Brazil and India are supplying
non-GM soya.1 Brazil prohibits the growing
and import of GM soya, and over the last two
years its share of the world soya market has
risen from 24 per cent to 30 per cent.10 It is
now under intense pressure from Monsanto
to allow GM soya to be grown, but the
Brazilian government is resisting; its
exporters have a profitable trade in
non-GM soya.1 There are now calls from the
European farm sector to expand production
and supply the domestic GM-free market.11
With the loss of markets farm commodity
prices have been falling. The farming sector
is starting to despair about the effect of GM
crops on their trade and the farmers in nonGM countries are exploiting the situation.
The main response of the US government
has been to try to press other countries to
accept GM crops. But farming organisations
like the American Corn Growers Association
(ACGA) are arguing that this is “Hardly a
consumer-oriented approach” and that the
best response commercially would be to try
to supply market demand.7 Twenty-six farm
groups are now urging farmers to plant
non-GM seeds this year to preserve their
markets. Fearing Monsanto’s planned

introduction of GM wheat will destroy the
highly valuable wheat market, the US and
Canadian wheat sector is now lobbying
fiercely against this.4, 12

International reaction

The collapse of the North American export
trade has resulted from a combination
of market rejection of GM food and,
increasingly, of GM animal feed as well,
and government rules on GM food. These
factors have been compounded by the lack
of segregation in the industry.
Almost the entire European food retail
and manufacturing industry has adopted
a ban on GM ingredients in their products
(for example, Nestle, Unilever, Heinz, and
the major supermarkets).1 Publicly, the
major UK retailers are stressing the non-GM
nature of their own brand products, and
many of them have also committed to
extend their GM-free policies to animal
feed for their meat and dairy products
(for example Asda, the Co-op, Safeways,
Sainsburys and Tesco). A number of
Japanese food companies are also adopting
GM-free policies.13 China, which accounts for
12 per cent of the world soya import market
has been using GM crops only for animal
feed, but has started to pressure soya traders
to supply non-GM soya.1
Underpinning these market forces are
government policies on GMOs. While only
four countries are heading down a GM path,
there are now more than 35 countries with
either laws in place, or in the pipeline, that
impose special labelling or import rules on
foods with GM ingredients. In total more
than half the world’s population is covered
by restrictions on the use and sale of GM
crops, and this is tightening all the time.1
Most of these 35 countries have adopted
GM labelling rules. They include the EU,
Japan (which takes 20 per cent of US food
exports), China, Australia, New Zealand,
Russia and the Czech Republic.1 The EU’s
labelling rules cover food containing GM
material, and there are proposals to extend
them to also cover food derived from GMOs
and GM animal feed sold to livestock
producers.14 In addition, the EU has only
approved certain GM varieties for import,
which means that bulk shipments containing
mixtures of approved and unapproved
varieties are not accepted.13
At an international level, the adoption of
the Biosafety Protocol (signed by the US in
2000) allows importing countries to block
GM products on “precautionary” grounds.13

N AT I O N A L FA R M E C O N O M Y 4 5

Several countries such as France, Germany,
Austria and Portugal have banned the
import of specific GM varieties; some such
as Bolivia and Croatia have imposed total
bans on all GMOs.1 Representatives of the
Russian government said in 2000 they would
not buy GM crops “unless there was such a
desperate need to justify it.” 15

Domestic markets

The US market is now beginning to follow
Europe and Asia. First, major health food
retail chains such as Whole Foods and
Wild Oats rejected GMOs. Now mainstream
American retailer Trader Joe’s has followed
suit as a result of market research: “The
majority of our customers would prefer
to have products made without genetically
engineered ingredients.” Other US-based
food companies, including Frito-Lay, Gerber,
Heinz, Seagram and Hain, have also decided
not to use GMOs in their products.16
A study by Rutgers University Food Policy
Institute in November 2001 also revealed
that the vast majority of the US population
want GM food to be labelled.1 So far the
only US state to have enacted any laws
on GM labelling and contamination is
Maine.17 However, the US congress is now
considering GM labelling legislation.18 The
Canadian health minister also called for
mandatory labelling of GM food.19
Interestingly, the negative market
reception to GM maize, rape and soya has
been replicated in several other sectors,
leading to many proposed new GM crops
being abandoned by the biotechnology
companies. GM varieties of sugar beet,
tomatoes, tobacco, flax, and rice have all
been withdrawn after a negative reception
from the industry and markets. GM potatoes,
for example, were withdrawn from the US
market after rejections by McDonald’s,
Burger King, McCain’s and Pringles.1

Food aid

With mixed GM and non-GM produce
piling up in warehouses, the US seems to be
getting desperate to find outlets for its crops.
There have been, for example, reports of a
major increase in ‘veggie-burger’ production
to use up the supplies.20 One outlet which
does not require segregation has been
food aid. More than two million tonnes
of food aid is sent directly from the US to
developing countries each year. The World
Food Programme distributes another one

and a half million tonnes on behalf of the
US.21 In December 2000, the US gave $300
million to the Global Food for Education
programme, a scheme to deliver 680,000
tonnes of surplus grain to countries in need.
It is believed that this action was partly to
support the beleaguered maize market after
the StarLink crisis.22
This aid has not been welcomed by all
the recipients. Consumer groups in Bolivia,
Columbia and Equador sent samples to a
laboratory which revealed levels of GMOs
in soya and maize to be as high as 90 per
cent. Much of this was in children’s foods.
Dr Elizabeth Bravo, of Acción Ecológica in
Equador, said: “In Europe and the US, many
baby food companies don’t use engineered
ingredients in their products, but the US
has sent it to our children.” 22 In June 2002
a Bolivian NGO announced that a sample
of maize donated by the US as food aid
had tested positive for StarLink. “The US
considers this genetically engineered corn
unfit for human consumption and has
banned it for years. Yet it has been sent
to Bolivia as food aid” said Gabriel Hervas,
president of the Bolivian Forum on
Environment and Development.23

10.2 Subsidies
“Were it not for the … income support payments …
that act as a kind of limited economic damage
control system … farmers would be feeling a
much greater negative impact from the export
sales lost as a result of GMOs.”
Dan McGuire, policy chairman, American
Corn Growers Association, March 2002 7
The market failure of GM crops seems to
have made the agricultural sectors affected
more dependent on state subsidies in the
US. GM crops are certainly not the only
factor, but federal farm support for these
sectors has risen to record levels since their
introduction and further high inputs of
taxpayers’ money have just been agreed.
The introduction, in 1996, of the Federal
Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act
(FAIR), referred to as the ‘freedom to farm
act’, was intended to herald a major
decrease in subsidies over the next seven
years and move US farming towards a
greater reliance on market supply and
demand.24 In 1997, the USDA predicted
that total farm support would fall to
$1.2 billion annually by the year 2000.25
There was, instead, an “orgy of
supplemental spending bills” during this

46 SEEDS OF DOUBT

10.2 Key points
★ The market failure
of GM crops has
made US agriculture
more dependent on
government subsidies
★ US farm subsidies
were meant to have
decreased over the last
six years but increased
dramatically in line with
the growth in the area
of GM crops
★ Over this period, a
series of emergency
‘market loss assistance’
schemes were
introduced to
support farmers
★ The soya and maize
sectors received
50 per cent of the
total subsidies
★ The loss of export
markets as a result
of GM crops may
have required extra
subsidies in the order
of $10 billion over the
last few years.

Area planted to GM maize and soya in the US
(in millions of acres) 28
70

Direct government payments to US farmers
(in $ billions) 29
25

60
20

50

15

40
30

10

20
05

10

’94 ’95 ’96 ’97 ’98 ’99 ’00 ’01

period, according to the free market think
tank, the Cato Institute. Market prices for
the crops the subsidy regimes support fell
to near historic lows and, as a result, total
direct payments to farmers rose from an
average of $9 billion a year in the early
1990s to over $20 billion a year since 1998.24
Much of this increase came through
a series of ‘emergency’ bills.24 The
emergencies were not primarily drought
or floods but low commodity prices and
disappearing export markets. Of the many
different schemes by which money is passed
onto the farming community, the largest is
‘market loss assistance’ which arrived with
the wide uptake of GM crops, in October
1998. Under it, total payments rose from
$3 billion in 1999 to $11.1 billion in 2000.26
The subsidies are far from evenly
distributed across the farm sectors but
the sectors with the main GM crops are all
generously supported. Fifty per cent of the
total subsidy money goes to the soya and
maize sectors. Another 40 per cent goes
to the cotton, wheat and rice sectors.26 Soya
only came into the equation in 1998, around
the time GM varieties started to make an
impact but it is now subsidised to 20–25
per cent of the market value of the crop.27
GM crops are unlikely to be the only
reason why the profitability of US farming
fell over the last five years. The opening
of farm trade, through NAFTA (North
American Free Trade Agreement) in
1994 and the Uruguay Round of the GATT
(General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade)
from July 1995, is likely to be a major cause.
The continued rationalisation of the food
and agricultural supply chain up and down
stream from the farmers is likely to be
another. However, GM crops appear to have
been a key contributor. There is certainly
a good parallel between the growth in the

’94 ’95 ’96 ’97 ’98 ’99 ’00 ’01

area planted to GM crops and the amount
of money paid to farmers in subsidies (see
graphs above).
Some US farm analysts have now
concluded that GM crops have partly caused
the rise in subsidies. According to the ACGA,
as well as the higher priced seed, “the export
markets that are lost as a result of GMOs
cause even lower grain prices, further
reducing farm incomes, while raising farm
programme expenditures.” 7 The ACGA
calculates that the lost maize exports added
about 29 per cent to the US’s end of year
stocks, reducing the average maize price by
13–20 per cent. After excluding subsidies,
Dr Benbrook has calculated that maize
production losses have exceeded $100 per
acre since 1999, and that growers have only
been kept afloat by the dramatic increase
in subsidies.30 He estimates that the loss
of export markets has required a $3 to
$5 billion increase in annual government
farm subsidies.31 This suggests that GM crops
may have required total extra government
subsidies of the order of $10 billion over the
last few years. As GM crops are less profitable
than non-GM crops, they must be more
dependent than non-GM crops on these
subsidies.
Despite subsidies being at record levels,
the farm incomes of the majority of US
farmers are still very low. Nevertheless,
the subsidies have helped to mask the
economic failure of GM crops from farmers.
The high levels of agricultural spending
are set to continue. In May 2002, the US
Senate ratified a new farm bill that will
provide a record $180 billion over the next
10 years in subsidy – about 60 cents for each
dollar of output, according to USDA figures.
Again, this will be almost exclusively for
maize, soya, cotton, wheat and rice.32

SEEDS OF DOUBT 47

“Farmers are being sued for having GMOs on their
property that they did not buy, do not want, will
not use and cannot sell.”
Tom Wiley, farmer, North Dakota1

11

Legal issues

GM contamination has introduced North
American farmers to a range of complex
legal problems. A morass of litigation
in the US and Canada is embracing all
levels of the industry: farmers, processors,
retailers, consumers, and the biotechnology
companies. It includes biotechnology
companies suing farmers for the effects
of contamination, farmers suing the
biotechnology companies for the effects of
contamination, and calls from the farming
industry for new GM varieties to be banned
and new legislation to be introduced.
The legal issues include severe problems
connected with alleged patent infringement,
with Monsanto demanding money from
farmers for the presence of unlicensed GM
plants found on their land. It also includes
lawsuits following the loss of farmers’ sales
and concerns over farmers’ exposure to
liability risks following from contamination.
The level of the problems has been
such that it has led to the interest and
involvement of Congress. Proposals have
been tabled for comprehensive legislation
to address the problems of GM crops.

11.1 Patent infringement
One of the most unpleasant outcomes of
GM crop contamination is how it has made
farmers vulnerable to claims that they have
infringed patent rights. While disowning
responsibility for the negative effects of
contamination, Monsanto is pursuing its
rights to its patented varieties vigorously and
extensively. Farmers are told they have
planted GM varieties and, backed up by the
threat of legal action, many have been asked
to pay large sums of money. Monsanto has
even set up a special telephone number to
encourage suspects to be reported to them.
At least some of the claims are

contested, and, most worryingly, Percy
Schmeiser’s case shows that contamination
of a farmers’ non-GM crop constitutes
a patent infringement too. Monsanto also
seems to be not just asking for the fee on
the proportion of the crop that is GM but
for the whole crop.
The examples overleaf and that of Troy
Roush (see chapter 9) are rare cases where
the farmers have fought back. The most
usual outcome is that farmers have agreed
to pay the sums demanded. For example,
in a 1998 press release, Monsanto listed
five examples where they had successfully
extracted money from farmers who had
been “illegally pirating seed”:
• David Chaney from Kentucky agreed
to pay Monsanto a $35,000 royalty
• Another Kentucky farmer agreed to
pay $25,000
• An Iowa farmer agreed to pay $16,000
• Two Illinois farmers paid $15,000 and
$10,000.
As part of the settlements, the farmers
have to sign gagging clauses and agree to
Monsanto having access to their land for
the following years. But as this press release
shows, while the farmers are bound to
silence, Monsanto has felt free to publicise
the ‘villains’ to the rest of the farming
community. The press release also states
“other actions taken in 1998 include crop
destruction and confiscation of seed.”
It appears that Monsanto is currently
taking dozens of farmers to court and
threatening many more with legal action
if they do not agree to pay. It has recently
brought actions similar to that against Percy
Schmeiser against farmers in North Dakota,
South Dakota, Indiana and Louisiana.5 It
is impossible to assess the exact number
of people in this situation due to the use of
gagging orders with those who have settled.

48 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Percy Schmeiser
In 1998, Percy Schmeiser, a farmer from Humbolt,
Saskatchewan was served a lawsuit claiming that
he had infringed a Monsanto patent by growing
Roundup Ready oilseed rape without a licence.
Percy is adamant that he did not grow GM rape
and it could only have arrived by contamination.
“In my case, I never had anything to do with
Monsanto, outside of buying chemicals.” If there
were any GM plants among his crops, then they
threatened to destroy 50 years of his work
breeding conventional oilseed rape.
Percy Schmeiser decided to fight. Initially
Monsanto said that they had received a ‘tip-off’
that he was ‘brown-bagging’, that is saving seed
that he had no licence for. This was disputed and
in the end the company admitted that there was
no evidence of him cheating. But Monsanto still
believed he had some of ‘their’ plants on his land.
Indeed they claimed that over 90 per cent of his
crop was GM. However, independent tests done
for Percy found varying levels of RR rape from
zero per cent in most samples, but one
with over 60 per cent.
Percy said that he had simply planted his
field with seed saved from the previous year, as
he had always done. He had noticed, however,
many RR rape volunteers growing near a field of
a neighbour who had been growing RR rape, and
thinks that is how his land became contaminated.
The matter came to court. Percy argued that
he had not planted RR rape and if his crop was
contaminated, he had in no way benefited, so
Monsanto’s claim was completely unjustified.
On 29 March 2001, Judge W Andrew
MacKay’s ruling sent shock waves through the

farming community, and left Percy Schmeiser
with a bill for some $600,000. The judgement
ruled that the “source of the Roundup resistant
canola … is really not significant for the issue
of infringement” This means that by having
Monsanto’s GM seed contaminating his land,
through no fault of his own, Percy Schmeiser
was liable to pay the corporation for the seed’s
presence and indeed for his whole crop.
Schmeiser’s costs were made up of about
$250,000 in legal fees, $105,000 in profits
that Monsanto claim Schmeiser made on the
1998 crop, $13,500 for technology fees to the
company ($15 an acre), and $25,000 in punitive
damages. On top of this, Schmeiser says he
has spent $160,000 on legal fees and another
$40,000 in time, travel and compensation for
labour he had to hire when he was away from
the farm. He thinks that Monsanto asked for
such a large amount to intimidate others from
standing up to the corporation.
“My wife always says that if she went down
to Monsanto’s headquarters and destroyed
some of their plants by cross-pollination or
contamination, she is certain she would be
thrown in jail. Why does Monsanto have such
a right? They admitted at my trial that they
knew it would cross-pollinate or contaminate”
says Percy Schmeiser.
Percy and his wife, both in their 70s,
are appealing against the decision. They had
been intending to retire before this all started.
Now they have been forced into the limelight
and asked to speak all around the world of
their experiences.2

LEGAL ISSUES 49

The Nelson Family
The Nelson family has built up a successful
farming enterprise, working nearly 9,000 acres
of land, in Amenia, North Dakota. When two
investigators from Monsanto arrived on Rodney
Nelson’s doorstep in November 1999, apparently
acting on a tip-off, he had no reason to worry.
He had used Monsanto products but always
followed the agreements.
In 1998 he had grown 62 acres of
Roundup Ready soya as a trial run but was very
disappointed with the variety’s performance.
Even if he had been interested in ‘brownbagging’, this would not have been the seed
to save. In 1999, he had tried a different variety
of RR soya over 1,500 acres – about a third of
his soya crop.3 Aside from the $56,240 seed
bill, he had paid a technology fee of $18,800
to Monsanto. But the Roundup Ready plants had
again yielded poorly. Growing next to fields with
conventional varieties, the modified plants yielded
up to 12 bushels/acre less.3
The investigators set out to sample his
fields. They refused to allow Rodney Nelson to
accompany them. At the time he was surprised
at how little time it took them to complete their
work, but that was the last he expected to hear
from them.
The letter that arrived in late July the following
year from a New Orleans law firm came as a
shock. The Nelsons found themselves accused
of saving seed by Monsanto. Rodney decided
to fight. The more he found out about the way
Monsanto had ‘investigated’ them, the more
determined he became to see the case through.
When he eventually managed to get

Monsanto to hand over details of the
allegations, he found that around 50 per cent
of the samples claimed to have been collected
by the ‘inspectors’ were not from his land.
One was taken from a field of sugar beet and
another was from a neighbour’s field twelve
miles away. When asked, Monsanto refused
to say what percentage of Rodney’s land had
been found to have Roundup Ready soya.
Rodney also looked at what the inspectors
had claimed to have done in their search –
and found that it would have been physically
impossible to cover all the ground claimed in
the time they spent on his land.
So he was surprised that Monsanto persisted
in claiming he had been pirating seed. In midOctober 2000, the company filed a lawsuit
against the family, suing them for planting
saved Roundup Ready soya. Rodney then spent
a small fortune collecting evidence to counter
their claims. As it turned out Monsanto gave
in – settling the case, but still managed to get
a gagging clause over the Nelsons. All Rodney
was able to say was that “we are still hurting,
emotionally and financially.”
He would have liked to turn down the
Monsanto offer and have his case vindicated in
court. But with his father seriously ill, he felt he
could not continue with the traumatic process.4

50 SEEDS OF DOUBT

How demands for payment are made

There seems to be a well-established
procedure by which seed piracy is alleged.
Farmers and seed suppliers are encouraged
to contact Monsanto if they have any
information about suspected seed piracy.
A freephone number has been specially
set up in the US: 1-800-ROUNDUP.6 When
called in February 2002, Gail Outtrim of
Monsanto admitted it was a ‘snitch line’.
It was made clear that any information
given by suspicious farmers would be
treated in absolute confidence. “If you
see a neighbour keeping seed, you can
call us, anonymously, and give us the
details … We may get a call from a retailer
who has noticed that a farmer is buying
Roundup the year after buying Roundup
Ready seeds.”7
Hired inspectors arrive at farms to take
crop samples for testing. Scott Good, a
soya farmer from New Jersey described
their arrival: “They showed up at my door
at six o’clock in the morning. They flipped
a badge out. It wasn’t polite what they
were saying. They acted like the FBI.
I was scared.” 8 It seems they usually
refuse to be accompanied by the farmer.
The next stage is a letter from the
company lawyers making a clear set of
demands, backed up with the threat of
prosecution. In November 1998, a letter was
sent to an elderly farmer in Saskatchewan,
who has asked to remain anonymous. The
letter was from Keith MacMillan, director
of legal affairs at Monsanto Canada. He
stated that Monsanto had completed their
investigation of the farm, with the help
of Robinson Investigation Ltd, “and have
very good evidence to believe that Roundup
Ready Canola was planted on approximately
250 acres of land … in violation of
Monsanto’s proprietary rights … Prior to
making any final decision as to what steps
we will be taking, and in an attempt to
resolve this issue in a timely and economical
manner, we are prepared to refrain from
commencing any legal proceedings against
you subject to the following:
• You forthwith pay to Monsanto the
following sum, 250A x $115/A = $28,750
• You acknowledge Monsanto has the right
to take samples from all your owned or
leased land and storage bins for three
years from the date of this letter
• You agree not to disclose the specific
terms and conditions of this settlement
agreement to any third party
• You agree that Monsanto shall at its sole
discretion have the right to disclose the

Carlyle Moritz
On 23 January 2002, Aaron Mitchell, the
intellectual property protection manager of
Monsanto, wrote to Carlyle Moritz, a farmer
from Bruno, Saskatchewan. The letter stated
that as a result of an investigation carried out
by Robinson Investigations the previous year,
“Monsanto has concluded that Roundup
Ready canola was improperly planted on
140 acres.” A specific location was cited.
Carlyle Moritz is one of the farmers who
testified on behalf of Percy Schmeiser. He had
felt it prudent to take a few precautions in the
event of Monsanto taking action against him.
So his attorney responded with a letter that
indicated his preparedness. “In response to
Mr Moritz’s belief that Monsanto might
attempt to set him up, and in accordance
with legal advice, he took several steps to
protect evidence in order that he could
adequately defend himself.”
These steps included the use of
independent agronomists to visit the farm
and retain samples of the seeds that were
sown, and getting an independent record
of the type of grain sown, the acreage
involved, and the GPS measurements
indicating the locations.
This allowed the attorneys to point out to
Monsanto that their figures were extremely
inaccurate. For example, the field in question
only had 84 acres planted, 34 acres seeded
to non-GM oilseed rape and another 50
acres seeded to wheat in 2001. So how they
determined that there were 140 acres planted
to GM oilseed rape on the field is a mystery.
The attorneys conclude that “the acreages
are ludicrous, the testing appears to be
inaccurate … Please be assured that any
further attempts to obtain payment or
litigation will be met with full legal defences,
including a claim for punitive damages based
on the apparent disregard for any factual
basis for the claim.”2

LEGAL ISSUES 51

11.1 Key points
★ Monsanto is accusing
many farmers of
growing unlicensed GM
crops and demanding
large sums of money
or threatening
legal action
★ Even non-GM farmers
whose crops become
contaminated can
be successfully sued
– whether they
intentionally grew
unlicensed seeds
or had their crop
contaminated is
considered irrelevant
under Canadian law
★ At least some of
these claims seem to
be unfounded. Some
farmers have contested
the claims; most have
paid Monsanto up to
$35,000
★ The accusations
have far-reaching
effects, with company
inspectors taking crop
samples, payment
demands by company
lawyers, gagging
orders, and the farmers
being required to let
the company inspect
their farms for the
next few years
★ Monsanto has set-up
a ‘snitch-line’ to
encourage farmers to
report on neighbours
whom they suspect
★ To defend themselves,
some farmers are
now paying for
independently
verified crop samples
and monitoring of
their activities.

facts and settlement terms associated
with the investigation and this settlement
agreement.”9
As Rodney Nelson explained, it does not
matter how much of the GM variety is
present: “They don’t test for a percentage,
they just test with an ‘elisa’ test which gives
them a ‘yes’ or ‘no’. In other words you
could have a sample of 1,000 beans that
were non-GMO and have one bean in there
that was GMO and Monsanto would get a
positive test and you would be infringing
on their patent. At least that’s what they
claim when they are suing you.”10
In the above instance, the farmer fought
and had the case against him dropped. Only
one case has been argued through in court,
Monsanto vs. Percy Schmeiser. This ended
with the judgement being based not on the
origin of the GM plants but simply their
presence, and the judge favouring the
biotechnology company. The case studies
show that even if a claim is unjustified, the
decision to contest the company’s claim can
be very expensive, painful and high risk.

A legal quagmire for farmers

If a farmer grows a GM crop without paying
a technology fee to the biotechnology
company that developed and patented
it, they can be accused of stealing the
intellectual property of that company.
The farmer is infringing the company’s
patent. On the same grounds, farmers
growing GM crops are prohibited, by the
technology agreements they sign with the
companies, from saving GM seed from the
harvest for the following year. They have
to buy new seed each year. No doubt some
farmers have saved GM seed illegally; after
all, saving seed has been a traditional
practice in farming for a long time.
However, the farmer could easily be
innocent. They could have bought some
seed that someone else had saved in breach
of contract, or their field might have become
contaminated through airborne pollen
or seeds, through hired machinery, new
livestock, floodwater, or through volunteers
from a previous licensed GM crop. As
this report has shown, widespread GM
contamination of crops is inevitable when
GM crops are widely grown in a region.
Farmers growing GM crops are especially
vulnerable as the technology agreement
allows the companies access to their land,
and they may already be struggling with
GM volunteers.

The Schmeiser case raises a very serious
problem. If the way the seed arrives is
deemed immaterial, then farmers in North
America can be held accountable for the air
or insect-borne transfer of patented varieties.
Though they are not intentionally growing
the GM crop, they can still be held
responsible for GM plants appearing on
their land. A non-GM farmer has few means
of preventing contamination if he is in a GM
growing area. The strategies that he could
employ to mitigate the risk, such as planting
hedges and changing his rotation, are not
foolproof and would be at a cost to him.
Indeed, the affected farmers feel that they
are the injured party if their land has been
contaminated, particularly if they are trying
to supply the GM-free or organic markets or
control GM volunteers.
Professor Anne Clark, from the University
of Guelph, believes that the whole issue of
contamination raises a legal and practical
conundrum for farmers:
“To appreciate the gravity of the choice
on offer, you need to appreciate how
Monsanto’s hired investigators operate.
They come to the door, advise you that
you’re suspected of brown-bagging, and
offer you a letter stipulating what you
must pay to avoid being formally
prosecuted. Should you choose to pay
the fee, you are also obliged to sign a
letter which states that signing obliges
you to remain silent and tell no one
about what has happened, or face
further prosecution.
Let’s say you know that you have one
or more of Roundup Ready, Liberty Link,
Navigator/Compas or SMART canola on
your land. You know this because, like
Schmeiser, the plants didn’t die when
you used the corresponding herbicide.
So – what do you do? Do you call up the
company … inform them that you have
infringed upon their respective patent(s),
and ask them to come out for a visit –
then hope they arrive with a sprayer and
not a subpoena? If the latter, no one will
ever know, will they? Or do you wait for
a neighbour to report you for suspected
brown-bagging, using the anonymous
hotline set up by Monsanto for that
purpose?
If the respective companies come out
and actually do spray out the offending
plants, do you call them back again a few
weeks later, when late germinating canola
has emerged in your wheat or pea crop?
Will they compensate you for damage
done to your crop in the process?

52 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Arnold Taylor
Organic farmer,
and president of the
Saskatchewan Organic
Directorate, Arnold Taylor
has had to abandon
growing oilseed rape on
his 3,500 acre farm in
Saskatchewan. This costs
him C$20,000 a year as
a direct loss and also
restricts his crop rotation
choices.12

The Stiegelmeiers’
neighbour
Jim and Emily Stiegelmeier
farm in South Dakota.
They reckon that 85 per
cent of the soya and at
least 60 per cent of the
maize in the state are
now GM varieties. A
neighbouring organic
grower had a crop that
could not be sold to the
organic market as a
result of contamination.
He received a ‘no-blame’
compensation deal –
there was no admission
of liability.13

What if it was canola you were
intending to plant in the contaminated
field? You know that you will not be able
to distinguish volunteer HT canola from
whatever canola you’ve planted. You know
that volunteer HT canola will set seed and
shatter … re-contaminating the land with
patent-infringing seed. Where you had
one HT plant this year, you could have
dozens next year. So – do you abstain
from growing canola entirely?
Do you take responsibility yourself for
eliminating the proprietary plants? Do you
adjust your crop rotation, your herbicide
expenditures – and your bottom line –
to cope with contamination that you
did not want and could not stop, and
that will reoccur annually so long as
neighbours choose to grow HT canola?” 11
The options open to the farmer who is
then faced with an unfounded or unjustified
claims, are even more unpleasant. Farmers
can either pay a considerable sum, or
contest it. If they chose the latter, they will
be locked into a complex, demanding and
uncertain legal battle with a powerful
company for years. From the case studies,
it appears that the only way for a farmer to
be able to defend himself against a claim, is
to keep detailed and independently verified
records of all his relevant cropping and
agrochemical actions. While this effort was
well justified in the case of Carlyle Moritz,
it does not seem reasonable that all farmers
should have to do this.
Contamination has very serious
implications, for farmers growing GM crops
and those trying to avoid them. The very
presence of unwanted crops can result in
legal action against the farmer who has
suffered contamination. For farmers who
fear an accusation of patent infringement,
they may feel the most practical approach
is simply to grow GM crops and leave no
doubt, as Troy Roush did (chapter 9).
Perhaps the continued large acreage of
GM crops is partly to do with farmers being
locked into a situation they feel they cannot
escape from, rather than any real desire
to be growing GM crops.

11.2 Compensation
As contamination spreads and the markets
for guaranteed GM-free and organic
products continue to grow, more and
more farmers are losing business. There is
a growing movement of farmers in North

Saskatchewan Organic Directorate
class action
The Saskatchewan Organic Directorate
(SOD) is one of Canada’s leading organic
sector groups. On 10 January 2002 two SOD
members, Larry Hoffman and Dale Beaudoin,
launched a class action against Monsanto and
Aventis on behalf of all certified organic grain
farmers in Saskatchewan.14 They are seeking
compensation for damages for financial loss
from the destruction of the province’s organic
rape market that resulted from the spread of
RR rape into organic varieties. They are also
seeking an injunction to prevent Monsanto
from introducing GM wheat into the state.15
Also on the table is the possibility of
including the federal government in the
suit because of its role in allowing the
introduction of transgenic crops, said Terry
Zakreski, the lawyer representing the SOD.16
Their claim alleges that GM oilseed
rape has “spread across the prairies
and contaminated conventional crops so
extensively that most certified organic grain
farmers no longer attempt to grow canola.”15
It goes on to say “when Monsanto and
Aventis introduced their GE canolas they
knew, or ought to have known, that the
genetically engineered canola would
spread and contaminate the environment.
The companies had no regard for the
damage these crops would cause to organic
agriculture. The claim alleges that the loss
of canola as an organic crop has robbed
organic farmers of a high paying and
growing market.”15
The suit seeks to hold Monsanto and
Aventis responsible for the economic
damages of GM contamination on multiple
grounds including negligence, nuisance,
trespass, pollution and failure to conduct
an environmental assessment.15 Estimates
for the damages run into millions of dollars.14

LEGAL ISSUES 53

11.2 Key points
★ Farmers are turning
to the courts for
compensation from
the biotechnology
companies for the
loss of sales and
markets as a result
of contamination
★ In Saskatchewan,
a class action has
been launched against
Monsanto and Aventis
for the loss of nearly
the whole organic rape
sector in the province.

America now turning to the courts to seek
compensation. In the US in 2001, the
National Farmers Union adopted a policy
on GMOs which said that market losses
must be fully reimbursed to the farmer.
In Canada, the Saskatchewan Organic
Directorate launched an even more
ambitious project at the beginning of this
year on behalf of the whole organic sector
in Saskatchewan for damages for the loss
of the whole organic rape market.

11.3 Liability
“If I contaminate my neighbor’s property, I am
held responsible. Farmers need legal protection to
ensure that if the biotech industry contaminates
their crops with GMOs, the industry is held
responsible.”
Tom Wiley, North Dakota Farmer 17
Farmers considering the costs and benefits
of growing GM crops have to factor in many
legal liability issues. Monsanto is clear about
its liability: in its 2000 technology guide,
it states: “In no event shall Monsanto or
any other seller be liable for any incidental,
consequential, special or punitive
damages … the limit of the liability of
Monsanto … shall be the purchase price
paid by the user.” 19
Many things can go wrong with GM crops
as a result of contamination and farmers are
vulnerable to being held accountable for
these. The Farmers’ Legal Action Group,
a non-profit law advisory centre based in
Minnesota, says the risks of liability for
farmers growing GM crops or in an area
with GM crops include:
• Tort-based liability – such as claims of
damages from a neighbouring farm which
has suffered economic losses from genetic
drift and crop contamination. This could
be based on claims of trespass, through
GM pollen crossing the boundary of his
farm. Alternatively, it could be based on
private nuisance, through the pollen drift
interfering with the use of the farm or
decreasing its value
• Contract-based liability – this could result
from breaching a clause in the technology
agreement signed by the farmer, for
example, by the farmer saving GM seed or
having a contaminated crop, not planting
a buffer zone, or not preventing the sold
GM crop from later co-mingling with and
contaminating non-GM produce. It could
also result from a farmer's sales contract,

StarLink Bt maize
The legal fall out from the StarLink
contamination crisis in September 2000 has
affected farmers, the food industry, consumers
and Aventis, the biotechnology company
which developed the maize. By November
2001, nine class actions had been filed against
Aventis, as individuals and companies tried to
recover millions of dollars in losses and costs.
Farmers in Wisconsin who lost money due
to the fall in maize prices following the crisis
have filed a class action (Southview Farms vs
Aventis). In another class action (Mulholland
vs Aventis), farmers are suing for the domestic
and foreign markets that they claim were
lost because Aventis failed to prevent StarLink
maize from entering the food supply. They
are alleging public nuisance, consumer fraud,
deceptive business practices, and negligence.14
Consumers have brought a class action
against Aventis and several food companies,
based on the allergic reactions that have been
suffered. In a recent settlement the companies
agreed to pay $9 million. Companies involved
in the lawsuit included Kraft Foods, Azteca
Foods and AstraZeneca affiliate Garst Seed.18
Thousands of Taco Bell restaurant franchises
and other Mexican food companies have filed
another class action against Aventis. They
claim that the discovery of StarLink in their
products resulted in the company becoming
the ‘poster child’ for concerns about GMOs.5
However, liability is very unclear in
the StarLink case and farmers could find
themselves held liable for damages. Aventis
had meant to get farmers to sign a grower
agreement requiring them to plant 660 foot
buffer strips of non-StarLink maize around
the fields and explaining that the maize
was not approved for human consumption.
However, many farmers claim that they
were unaware of a marketing restriction and
many agreements were not signed before
planting. Also, StarLink maize was in many
cases planted directly next to a neighbour’s
non-StarLink maize. Many of these then
tested positive for the StarLink Cry9C protein.5
Just one per cent of the national maize
harvest contaminated almost half the total
US maize supply, which leads to some
difficult legal questions. Who is liable for
contaminated maize ‘infecting’ entire
shipments of maize? Who is liable for the
contamination not being picked up until
the maize had been processed into a wide
range of products? Who is liable for StarLink
crops contaminating neighbouring crops of
non-StarLink maize?

54 SEEDS OF DOUBT

11.3 Key points
★ Nine class actions
have been filed against
Aventis following the
StarLink contamination
incident
★ Two are by farmers
for the fall in maize
prices and the loss of
domestic and export
markets that followed
★ Farmers themselves
may face legal
challenges for
problems caused
by contamination
★ GM farmers could
be held liable for
contaminating the
non-GM crops of
their neighbours or
for not preventing
contamination of
non-GM crops in
the supply chain
★ Non-GM farmers
could be held liable for
patent infringement or
breach of a GM-free
sales contract
★ The food and farming
industry are now
discussing the need for
an agreed framework
for GM liability.

for example, for supplying GM
contaminated crops on a GM-free contract
• Regulatory liability – this would apply
to non-GM farmers whose crops become
contaminated by GM varieties and are
considered to have infringed company
patent rights as a result of having
unlicensed plants on their land.5

Frameworks for GM liability

The food and farming industry in North
America is now discussing the need for a
framework that establishes where liability
lies for GM contamination incidents. The
lack of a clear framework has meant striking
inconsistencies have developed and farmers
are very uncertain about their legal position.
On the one hand, a contaminated crop is
a liability for farmers, who can be sued by
the biotechnology companies for having
unlicensed GM plants on their land. On
the other, farmers who have had crops
contaminated are holding the biotechnology
companies liable for the loss of their
markets.
A framework would also mean that
farmers, the industry and the government
can avoid unreasonable financial costs
and have means of redress. Farmers are
angry that the biotechnology companies
are having it both ways: claiming their
economic rights to GM varieties even when
they are spreading by contamination, whilst
disowning liability for the negative impacts
of their spread on the income of farmers.17
Congress is now considering a bill on
liability (see chapter 11.5). Last year at
least four states considered legislation
on GM liability. Not surprisingly, the
biotechnology industry was very active
in challenging these.20
Strategies for managing the legal risks
of contamination were also considered at
a conference in Minneapolis in November
2001, which included the USDA, academia
and the biotechnology industry. One
recommendation was the establishment
of an indemnity fund to cover the market
losses caused by contamination of non-GM
and organic crops, possibly through a
federal crop insurance programme.
Alternatively, the biotechnology companies
could indemnify farmers against liability
in the event of a contamination lawsuit.
Another recommendation was the
establishment of a standard of behaviour
for GM farmers, including to identify the
duty of care they owe neighbours who grow
non-GM crops.14

11.4 Legal bans
“By the time it became evident to everyone
that we were losing EU markets, it was basically
too late…When they announced they were going
to apply the GMO process to wheat, alarm bells
went off.”
Todd Leake, North Dakota wheat farmer
and backer of state legislation prohibiting
GM wheat.21
It is not just the organic sector but groups
from the whole farming sector in North
America that are trying to prevent the
introduction of GM wheat. Having seen
the severe economic problems with GM
rape, maize and corn, the whole wheat
industry in the US and Canada has been
lobbying desperately for ways to prevent
the same thing happening to wheat, the
most valuable farm sector. They have been
pursuing this in a number of different ways.
In Canada, as well as the SOD class action,
more than 210 groups including the
National Farmers Union and the Canadian
Wheat Board demanded the halt of the
approval of GM wheat last July.23
In the US, North Dakota and Montana
farm representatives have sought legislation
restricting GM wheat production. Terry
Wanzek, chairman of North Dakota’s senate
agriculture committee said: “These bills are
surfacing in North Dakota because of a
genuine, sincere concern for the market.
Our major wheat customers say they won’t
accept any wheat that has genetically
enhanced characteristics, and we’re
listening to our customers.”24 In South
Dakota, state senator John Koskan is
working on a resolution that would prevent
farmers in the state growing GM wheat.25
In 2001 the US National Farmers Union
adopted a policy supporting a moratorium
on the introduction, certification and
commercialisation of genetically
engineered wheat until issues of crosspollination, liability, commodity and seed
stock segregation, and market development
are addressed.26
There are already precedents for state
bans on crop varieties which threaten the
trade or genetic purity of existing crops
in the US. California has been requiring
pre-market permits for new rice varieties
and not approving those which are
unapproved for export, as a way of
preventing co-mingling of approved and
unapproved varieties. Over 30 years ago,
California outlawed some cotton varieties
to maintain the genetic purity of the cotton
being grown there.27

LEGAL ISSUES 55

11.4 Key points
★ The North American
farming community
is now actively
opposing the
planned introduction
of GM wheat
★ More than 200
Canadian groups,
including the National
Farmers Union, Wheat
Board and organic
farming bodies are
seeking a halt to the
approval of GM wheat
★ In the US, the NFU
supports a moratorium
on GM wheat and
legislation banning
GM wheat has been
sought in some states
★ There are already
precedents for state
bans on crop varieties
which threaten the
trade or genetic purity
of existing crops in
the US.

Wheat

Across the prairies, wheat is the most
important crop. Nearly 70 per cent of
Canadian wheat and more than 50 per cent
of US wheat is exported.28 Currently wheat
exports from Canada are over seven million
tonnes a year, accounting for C$5 billion
annual exports.29 It would be devastating
if the wheat industry were to suffer similar
losses as the maize and oilseed rape sectors.
If some of the wheat crop was GM, it would
be a nightmare for the industry to manage
adequate segregation after harvest.30 For
organic farmers, wheat is a major crop and
essential for organic crop rotations. Losing
wheat to GM contamination could destroy
North American organic farming.15
It seems that the market will not accept
contaminated or GM wheat. According to
Canadian Wheat Board estimates, two-thirds
of international buyers do not want to buy
genetically modified wheat. A survey of the
US customer base for hard spring wheat
indicated that 65 per cent are opposed to
GM wheat.28 According to the American
Corn Growers Association, European millers
have described GM wheat as a ‘market
destructor’ for the US.31
Agricultural economist Hartley Furtan
has made an assessment of the likely impacts
of growing RR wheat. He concluded that
while there might be a small direct
economic benefit, this would be swamped
by the loss of premiums, costs of testing
and segregation and having to rely on
lower market prices.32
Monsanto has now pushed back its
planned introduction of GM wheat from
2003 to 2004 or 2005 and has said publicly
that it will only do so if it can first gain
pre-acceptance from buyers.24

11.5 Legislation
“This technology is totally different from
traditional breeding techniques … Current
laws … were not written with this technology
in mind.”
Dennis Kucinich, congressman, May 2002,
primary sponsor of new US legislation to
regulate the GM sector.33
The severity of the problems with GM crops
over the last few years has now convinced
many US politicians that the issues require
resolution at a national level. On 22 May
2002, legislation was introduced to Congress
to address the economic, market and legal
problems of GMOs. The five bills would

Saskatchewan Organic Directorate
class action
The lawsuit by the Saskatchewan Organic
Directorate (SOD) not only claims for
economic damages already done, it seeks
to prevent further trade losses. To prevent
the loss of the organic wheat market as well,
it is seeking an injunction on the release of
GM wheat.
The organic community views the arrival
of GM wheat with fear. Currently wheat is
the most important grain grown by certified
organic grain growers in Saskatchewan, and
their largest export. Arnold Taylor, president
of SOD said “If [GM] wheat were allowed,
it would decimate the organic industry.”12
In a presentation to the Canadian House
of Commons, the group said:
“This is a situation that needs immediate
attention … If crops free of unintended genetic
contamination cannot be grown, Canada will
not be able to service the expanding markets
for certified organic food. If GE wheat is
allowed to be registered for continued
confined trials and especially for unconfined
release into the Canadian environment, there
will be very negative impacts on certified
organic food production.”22
Saskatchewan farmers feel they have
no choice but to take legal action. Arnold
Taylor says “We’ve been forced to live with
GE canola. We've asked for a moratorium
on GE wheat, we've lobbied to change the
variety registration process, and we’ve just hit
a brick wall. We feel we have no choice left
but to pursue legal action. This is a matter
of survival for organic agriculture in
Saskatchewan.”15

56 SEEDS OF DOUBT

11.5 Key points
★ In May 2002,
legislation was
introduced to the
US Congress to
address the problems
of GM crops
★ One bill will introduce
protection for farmers,
allowing the saving of
seed and compensation
for crop failures
★ One bill will require
all GM food to be
labelled
★ One bill will make
the biotechnology
companies liable for
all negative impacts
of GMOs.

introduce legal protection for farmers,
increase GM food safety, introduce
mandatory labelling for all foods containing
or produced with GMOs, address developing
country issues, and assign liability for
damages. The bills have been endorsed
by the National Farmers Organisation,
the Center for Food Safety, Organic Trade
Association and the American Corn Growers
Association. A summary of three of the bills
is provided below.

H R 4812: The Genetically Engineered Crop
and Animal Farmer Protection Act of 2002

A bill to provide additional protections for
farmers who may be harmed economically
by genetically engineered seeds, plants, or
animals, to ensure fairness for farmers in
their dealings with biotech companies that
sell genetically engineered seeds, plants,
or animals, and for other purposes.
This bill provides several farmer rights
and protections to maintain the opportunity
to farm:
• Farmers may save seeds and seek
compensation from biotechnology
companies for failed genetically
engineered crops
• Biotechnology companies may not shift
liability to farmers, nor require access
to farmers’ property, nor mandate
arbitration, nor mandate court of
jurisdiction, nor require damages beyond
actual fees, or any other unfair condition
• Farmers must be informed of the risks
of using genetically engineered crops
• Seed companies must ensure seeds labelled
non-GE are accurate and provide clear
instructions to reduce cross pollination,
which contaminates other fields
• The Environmental Protection Agency
is required to evaluate the concern of Bt
resistant pests and take actions necessary
to prevent resistance to Bt, an important
organic pesticide.

H R 4814: The Genetically Engineered
Food Right To Know Act of 2002

A bill to amend the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act, the Federal Meat
Inspection Act, and the Poultry Products
Inspection Act to require that food that
contains a genetically engineered material,
or that is produced with a genetically
engineered material, be labelled accordingly.
This bill acknowledges consumers have

a right to know what genetically engineered
foods they are eating:
• Requires food companies to label all
foods that contain or are produced with
genetically engineered material
• Requires the Food and Drug
Administration to periodically test products
to ensure compliance (a threshold of one
per cent is established for accidental
contamination)
• Voluntary, non-GE food labels are
authorised
• A legal framework is established to ensure
the accuracy of labelling without creating
significant economic hardship on the
food production system.

H R 4816: The Genetically Engineered
Organism Liability Act of 2002

A bill to assign liability for injury caused
by genetically engineered organisms.
• The bill places all liability for negative
impacts of genetically engineered
organisms upon the biotechnology
companies that created the genetically
engineered organism
• Farmers are granted indemnification
to protect them from the liabilities of
biotechnology companies
• The bill prohibits any transfer of liability
away from the biotechnology companies
that created the genetically engineered
organism.

SEEDS OF DOUBT 57

12

Discussion
12.1 Results
Until now most public statements about
GM crops in North America have been
positive. The US government and the
biotechnology companies have stressed
the widespread growing of GM crops and
absence of reported problems as evidence
of the desirability and safety of GM crops.
As a result, some farmers’ leaders in the
UK have expressed concern about the UK
being left behind in growing GM crops.
We have not set out to do a
comprehensive survey of all experiences
of North American farmers with GM crops.
We wanted to see if the industry view that
GM crops have been an unqualified success
was true or not. We therefore sought out
negative experiences and not positive ones.
The results of our research have been
far more dramatic than was envisaged. We
have uncovered a great variety of negative
experiences for both those avoiding and
those growing GM crops. These reveal
fundamental problems with GM crops for
the whole agriculture sector. The wider
impacts of GM crops have been particularly
surprising, and, until now, unpublicised.
The evidence we have uncovered shows
that, however numerous the positive
experiences are, the introduction of GM
soya, maize and oilseed rape has been an
overall failure. The failures have been on
several levels, but particularly economic. We
cannot identify any net benefits except the
apparent convenience of HT and Bt crops.
Most worrying, GM crops have been critically
disruptive for the organic sector.
For farmers considering growing GM
crops, the crops have not, overall, delivered
on their promises of higher yields, better
returns and lower agrochemical use. The
only exception is Bt maize yields, though
there was no net income benefit. In most
cases they have performed worse than
non-GM crops, including substantially lower
yields for RR soya. The greater freedom to
use herbicides repeatedly and the weed and
volunteer problems of HT crops, must be
a cause of concern for the future. The lost
trade, fall in market prices, the decline in
farmers’ choice over their farming options
and the legal liability problems have been
major unexpected problems for all farmers.

Particular problems have emerged for
each of the three GM crops we studied:
• RR soya
At least six per cent lower yields, greater
reliance on herbicides, new emerging
weed problems, and plant health and
structural problems in certain conditions
• Bt maize
Practical constraints on growing Bt maize,
lost export markets, and possible animal
feed problems
• HT rape
Greater herbicide use, herbicide resistant
volunteers, end of most organic rape
production in Saskatchewan, lost
export markets.
The most serious problem that this
report has uncovered is the widespread
contamination which has undermined the
viability of the whole farming industry. We
are greatly concerned that the organic sector
has been severely hit, with one Canadian
province having almost lost its whole
organic rape sector, many organic farmers
having lost sales income and all struggling
practically and economically with the effects
of contamination on their businesses. In our
research, we found that the organic farming
community felt that they were in a critical
situation. They were glad of the robust
approach that Europe was taking on GMOs
and hoped it would help them in North
America. John Koskan, state senator for
Wood, South Dakota and also an organic
farmer said “The Europeans are driving
this issue, and I thank them for that.”1
Contamination has significantly increased
the costs and risks of the whole industry.
Non-GM farmers have found it hard, or
impossible, to grow GM-free crops and
access the GM-free markets for soya, maize
and rape. For those that try, there is the
risk of losing the sale. The threat of being
accused by a biotechnology company of
infringing their patent is a particularly
unpleasant problem to have emerged.
The most dramatic outcome of GM crops
has been the disruption to the food and
farming economy. Not only have GM farmers
found their crops fetching lower prices than
non-GM crops, but the fall in market prices
from the billions of dollars in lost trade as

58 SEEDS OF DOUBT

a result of the lack of segregation must be
a great concern. This has required roughly
$10 billion in extra farm subsidies to keep
farmers, particularly GM farmers, afloat over
the last few years. Contamination has been a
major burden on the food industry too, with
the StarLink incident costing the companies
involved well over a $1 billion. The only
helpful aspect has been the market
premiums for non-GM crops, which will
be helping to offset the price fall for those
growing non-GM crops. In total, with the
lower profitability of GM crops, the loss of
foreign trade, the lower market prices, the
costs of StarLink and other incidents, the
farm subsidy rise, and the lost IP and organic
market opportunities, GM crops could have
cost the US economy some $12 billion net
from 1999 to 2001.2
Many of the contamination problems can
be ascribed to inadequate crop separation
distances and a lack of segregation in the
distribution system. Though these issues
are now being addressed, the costs are being
borne by the whole industry, not just the GM
sector, and the measures have yet to prove
themselves. Overall, this report confirms
the findings of the European Commission
study on the theoretical risks, published
earlier this year. This concluded that the
introduction of GM crops would be very
expensive for the European farming
industry, due to the costs of managing
contamination. It stated that producing
GM-free crops would be extremely difficult
even with significant changes in farming
practice and compliance with a one per cent
adventitious contamination threshold in
non-GM crops could add 1–10 per cent to
production costs.3 In other words, the real
and theoretical evidence is that GM crops
disrupt GM-free production and greatly
reduce overall agricultural competitiveness.
The ultimate confirmation of our findings
must be that so many in the North American
farming community are now opposing GM
crops, lobbying for a moratorium on GM
wheat and urging farmers to plant non-GM
crops, or supporting federal labelling and
liability rules to regulate the GM sector .

12.2 Why are farmers
growing GM crops?
Our conclusion that GM crops have been
negative for farmers and the industry in
general calls into question, why so many
North American farmers adopted GM crops

and are still growing them. Our research has
provided several possible explanations which
we believe together account for the current
situation:
• Initial farmer ignorance over GM crops
and a very bad economic situation made
farmers vulnerable to the promises being
made by the biotechnology industry
• Some farmers have recounted that initially
they were not told that the seed they were
buying was GM – they were simply told it
was a new hybrid and they did not sign
any agreement prohibiting the saving
of seed 4
• The availability of many of the most
popular seed varieties only in GM form
after the biotechnology companies bought
the leading seed companies
• Some farm businesses have experienced
yield, agrochemical and overall income
benefits from GM crops depending on
the conditions in that area or year
• The greater convenience of HT and
Bt crops, and the culture of farmers of
aiming for completely weed-free fields
has been assisted by HT crops
• A lack of awareness of the agronomic and
market problems. Farming is an irregular
business with many variable factors outside
the control of the farmer, so agronomic or
market problems over a few years would
not necessarily be ascribed to GM crops
• The herbicide price war, apparently
involving subsidised chemicals being
offered to farmers, has offset the costs
of higher herbicide use
• Continued heavy marketing by the
biotechnology companies of the supposed
benefits of GM crops. According to
Shannon Story, women’s president of the
Canadian NFU , “the increase in acreage
is the result, more than anything, of a lot
of salesmanship” 5
• A shortage of independent information –
farmers need independent information
to be able to judge the pros and cons of
a technical development
• The ‘lock-in’ effect. Many factors have
meant that it is not easy for GM farmers
to stop growing GM crops: the shortage
of good non-GM varieties, crop
contamination risks, the lack of access
to premium GM-free markets, and the
accusations of patent infringement.
The latter may have the effect of making
farmers grow more GM crops, as growing
less would not necessarily reduce the
problems farmers face, while growing
more GM crops under licence reduces
the potential for dispute.

SEEDS OF DOUBT 59

• The gagging orders used by the
biotechnology companies, after patent
infringement allegations, have hidden the
scale of these problems from other farmers
• Farmers were told by the US government
and the biotechnology companies that the
international market problems were due
to foreign governments putting up barriers
to trade, and that the US government was
addressing this. They were not told about
the safety concerns and market rejection
• The ready provision of substantial extra
subsidies by the US government, has
masked the economic problems of
GM crops.

12.3 HT crops and the
12.3 biotechnology
companies
It is helpful to understand the importance
of HT crops to the biotechnology
companies. These companies are major
producers of agrochemicals. Hence the
dependence of the current GM varieties on
their products and the probability that HT
crops will not significantly reduce the use
of herbicides. Glyphosate is the world’s
highest selling herbicide and its sales are
of fundamental importance to Monsanto.
The company developed and introduced the
chemical nearly 30 years ago, and has since
been built on it. In 2000, Monsanto gained
about half its agricultural revenue from
glyphosate, some $2.8 billion.6
Monsanto’s US patent for glyphosate,
however, expired in 2000, meaning that
other companies can produce the chemical,
which is why herbicide prices have fallen.
The technology agreements make up for the
price fall. Farmers of HT crops have to pay
for these and they also bind them to using
the company’s own brand of glyphosate.
In the case of Monsanto, this is Roundup.
Roundup Ready crops were the centrepiece
of Monsanto’s strategy to ensure its
continued sales of glyphosate.7 While
publicly telling farmers that RR crops would
reduce their use of herbicides, behind the
scenes the company increased its production
of glyphosate to coincide with the release of
RR crops.8
To ensure an unobstructed market for
their HT crops, the biotechnology industry
also successfully lobbied for higher levels
of glyphosate residue to be allowed on
soyabeans. In 1997, the UK government
raised the maximum permitted residue

levels (MRL) of glyphosate on soyabeans
for human consumption 200 fold.9 The
new level is 20 mg/kg.10

12.4 What the
12.4 biotechnology
companies say
The biotechnology industry has a number
of arguments for their proposition that GM
crops have been successful:
• They must be successful because so many
farmers are growing them. This is possibly
the industry’s favourite argument. The
list in 12.2, however, provides many less
positive reasons why farmers are growing
GM crops so widely in North America
• A recent industry sponsored study said
that US yields have increased by 1.8
million tonnes, with Bt maize accounting
for 1.5 million tonnes.11 It is true that
Bt maize has increased yields by about
2.6 per cent on the circa 25 per cent of
the total maize area on which it is grown,
but this was not enough to cover the
higher production costs of Bt maize.
Though 1.5 million tonnes is only 0.6
per cent of the total maize grown in the
US each year, with the lost export markets,
greater yields are only adding to maize
stocks and having a negative effect on
US farm prices. In contrast, the lower
yields of GM soya should have reduced
the total soya production
• The study also said that GM crops
had reduced farmer production costs
by $1.2 billion a year, with $1 billion
accounted for by HT soya. It is hard to
see how this can be right. The technology
fee is a significant extra cost of GM crops
and while herbicide costs have indeed
fallen for farmers using HT crops, this is
mostly due to the large fall in herbicide
prices, rather than the attributes of HT
crops which are encouraging farmers to
apply more herbicide. In addition, the
industry figure of a $1.2 billion saving
has to be balanced against the costs to
individual farmers of the lower market
prices and the contamination problems
• HT crops lead to lower herbicide use.
There is much evidence referred to
by the biotechnology industry showing
that HT crops lower herbicide use. But
according to the independent researcher
Dr Benbrook, many of the claims that RR
soya reduces herbicide use can only be

60 SEEDS OF DOUBT

made with “a little misinformation and
a major dose of missing information.”12
• HT crops help the environment because
they facilitate no-till. No-till has certainly
been one of the main ways in which
farmers have reduced soil erosion in the
American Midwest. No-till is likely to be
a popular practice with the biotechnology
companies because it is dependent on
herbicide use, a feature that is fine for
them but means this system is not
necessarily better environmentally.

12.5 The political
situation in the UK
UK agriculture is still suffering economically
from a number of high profile, costly health
scares and a poor trading climate. It is
hard to see that it could withstand a new
economic burden, and the government
would not be ready to increase farm
subsidies in the way that the US government
has following the introduction of GM crops.
The farm health problems of BSE/CJD,
E.coli and salmonella, foot and mouth
disease and concerns over GMOs, have led
to a public crisis of confidence over the
government’s ability to handle risks in
agriculture and to reflect consumer
interests. This was the main reason for the
establishment of the Food Standards Agency
(FSA) in April 2000. However, the FSA
has yet to take a precautionary, consumeroriented position on GMOs, in the way
it has for BSE.
There is clear public opposition to GM
food and crops, as shown by numerous
surveys and strong local opposition to GM
crop sites. Current GMOs offer no benefit to
consumers, only a set of poorly researched
risks. The public have clearly expressed their
wish to retain the choice of GM-free food
and for labelling to enable this choice. A
recent survey by the Consumers Association
found 94 per cent of consumers want GM
food to be labelled.13 With the GM-free
policies of all the major food retailers there
is no market for GM food in the UK and
the market for GM feed is disappearing.
As long as a large proportion of consumers
continue to demand GM-free food, these
companies are unlikely to change their
policies. In other words, unlike North
American farmers, UK farmers would not
even have a domestic market were they to
grow GM crops.
The public instead support a return to

less intensive food production methods,
based on more natural processes. Research
commissioned by the FSA of consumer views,
including those of low-income consumers,
concluded that the preference of consumers
is for “farming to become less intensive.” 14
In particular, there is a strong demand for
organic food and an expansion of organic
farming. Three-quarters of households
bought some organic food in 2001,15 and
surveys show that 65 per cent of people
think that at least 30 per cent of farmland
should be organic (MORI, February 2001)
and 85 per cent want the government to
do more to encourage organic food (NOP,
March 2001). The organic sector also offers
important economic opportunities for UK
farmers. It is a high value and growing
market, worth over £900 million in 2002,
with 70 per cent being supplied by imports.
The government has already invested
in the development of organic farming in
the UK, through research and support for
farmer conversion. In the year to 2001, it
spent over £20 million on the organic sector,
and over a seven year period from 2001, it
has budgeted to spend £140 million on
farmer conversion in England alone.
A primary policy objective of the
Department for Environment, Food and
Rural Affairs is “to promote a sustainable,
competitive and safe food supply chain
which meets consumers’ requirements.” 16
The findings of this report show that GM
crops would obstruct the government in
meeting its objectives for food and farming.
Finally, the government is publicly
committed to ensuring that the expansion
of organic farming is not undermined by
GM crops. One of the government’s ‘public
service agreements’, is an expansion of
organic farming. In 1998 the UK minister
for food safety, Jeff Rooker, told the House
of Commons that the government would
“ensure that the expansion of organic
farming is not compromised by the
introduction of genetically modified
crops … Given the extremely tight public
expenditure restrictions to which we are
subject as part of our contract with the
electorate, it would be stupid for the
government to push more money into
converting to organic farming while allowing
the farmers who take that brave step to be
damaged by other actions.” He went on to
say, “I genuinely mean that – those are not
words to be put in Hansard and forgotten
about; I shall follow through.”

SEEDS OF DOUBT 61

13

Conclusions
The findings of our report are that GM
soya, maize and oilseed rape have overall
been very negative for North American
farmers and the farming industry in general.
While we have not researched the positive
experiences, the independent evidence and
feedback from the industry is that overall
these GM crops have mostly failed to realise
their claimed agronomic benefits and have
overall been a disaster economically for the
whole farming industry and especially for
the organic sector.
The large number of problems and
negative experiences include the loss of
most of the organic oilseed rape sector
in Canada; lost income for organic and
other GM-free producers; problems of
yield; greater reliance on herbicide use;
reduced farm incomes, herbicide resistant
volunteers; widespread contamination
of seed resources, crops, the food system
and bulk commodities; a decline in farmer
choice over their business options; lost
export trade; farm price falls; an increased
need for government subsidies; and legal
liability problems for farmers over company
patent rights on GM plants. The main
benefit for farmers seems to have been the
convenience of HT crops, but this has not
translated into income benefits. The other
positive aspect has been the increase in Bt
maize yields, but this too has not produced
net income benefits.
The findings show that GM crops
would obstruct the UK government from
meeting its public commitments and policy
objectives: to ensure that the expansion of
organic farming is not undermined by the
introduction of GM crops and that farming
should be competitive and meet consumer
requirements.
The Soil Association hopes this report will
be the start of a more balanced and realistic
debate on the likely impacts of GM crops
on farming in the UK, and help ensure
an informed decision on whether to allow
commercial growing of GM crops or remain
GM-free. We hope that the UK farming
community and government will base their
decisions on the independent and industry
evidence of the impacts of GM crops on
farmers in North America.

62 SEEDS OF DOUBT

Appendices
A1 Glossary
Billion

One thousand million.
Brown-bagging

Glyphosate

A broad spectrum herbicide, developed by
Monsanto. Now the world’s widest selling
herbicide, sold in many formulations,
including Roundup.

When a farmer saves seed from one year’s
harvest for planting the following year,
contravening company licence agreements.

Glufosinate

Bt

GM

The soil bacteria, Bacillus thuringiensis, which
produces an insecticidal toxin. Bt is used by
organic farmers as a form of biological pest
control. Some crops have been genetically
engineered to continuously produce the
Bt toxin – Bt crops.

Genetically modified. GM, genetically
engineered, or transgenic are all terms
that describe an organism or product of
an organism that has undergone genetic
engineering. GMO = genetically modified
organism.

Bushel

GM-free/non-GM

A measure of volume, equivalent to 64 US
pints (35.2 litres). One-hundred bushels
of maize is approximately 2.5 metric tonnes.

The American term for maize.

In the report, GM-free refers to seeds
or crops which are not of GM varieties
and are free from any adventitious GM
contamination. Non-GM refers to seeds or
crops that are meant to be only of varieties
that have not been genetically modified, but
which have or may have a low level of GMOs
present as contamination, because measures
have not been taken to avoid the risks of
contamination where such risks exist.

Elevator

Herbicide/pesticide/agrochemical

The first destination for harvested grain
crops in North America, where they are
cleaned and sorted before being taken
to processing plants.

Throughout the report herbicide refers
to chemicals which are used to kill weeds;
pesticide refers to chemicals such as
insecticides used to kill animal pests;
and agrochemicals for the whole range
of chemicals used in agriculture. However,
in some quotes ‘pesticide’ is used in its
American meaning to cover herbicides
as well.

Canola

The American term for oilseed rape.
Class action

A legal action brought by a few people,
acting for a larger group.
Corn

FDA

Food and Drug Administration, a US
government agency.
Gene flow

The introduction of genes, and hence the
associated characteristics, into a population
usually as a consequence of cross
fertilisation.
Gene stacking

The occurrence of several genetically
engineered traits in a single plant. This
can either be intentional or the result of
gene flow.
Genetic engineering

A process by which the genetic make up,
and thus the characteristics, of an organism
is altered artificially, usually by inserting
specific sequences of DNA into the
organisms’ own DNA. It is completely
different to natural reproductive processes.
Often DNA is used from a different species
with which normal breeding would be
impossible.

A broad spectrum herbicide, marketed by
Aventis under the name Liberty.

HT

Herbicide tolerant. HT crops are resistant
to the effects of a particular herbicide,
usually as a result of genetic engineering,
for example, Roundup Ready soya.
IP

Identity Preserved. A process of managing
seed, crops, food or other products to
guarantee the integrity of the final product
with respect to its original ingredients, for
example to guarantee that the product is
not contaminated with GMOs. It may involve
GM testing, segregated processing facilities,
the cleaning of equipment between GM
and non-GM lots, record keeping, and
independent auditing. IP systems are
used by manufacturers and retailers
to sell produce as GM-free.

SEEDS OF DOUBT 63

Isolation distances/separation
distances/buffer strips

cannot be chemically controlled as easily as
other weeds.

Distances used to separate GM from
non-GM crops to reduce the chances
of GM contamination by pollen transfer.

Technology fee

Multiple resistance

Technology use/grower agreement

The development of resistance to several
herbicides in one plant, such as would result
from gene stacking of separate herbicide
tolerant traits.

Contracts between the biotechnology
company or GM seed distributor and the
farmer. They allow the farmer to use the GM
seeds in exchange for complying with all of
the company’s management requirements,
such as separation distances. They may allow
the company access to the farmers’ fields to
inspect crops to look for any GM crops that
are not covered by the agreement.

No/low-till farming & minimum till

The practice of sowing land after no or only
very shallow soil cultivation, instead of the
traditional practice of ploughing land. It
involves clearing the land chemically of
weeds instead and drilling seeds directly into
the soil. It is used commonly to reduce soil
erosion in the American Midwest, though
it involves a greater use of herbicides than
systems based on mechanical ploughing
and cultivation.
Pollen drift/transfer

The movement of pollen by air or insects
often far from the original plant, which
can transfer genetically engineered traits
to compatible non-GM crops.
RR

Roundup Ready. RR crops have been
genetically engineered to be tolerant to
Roundup, a brand name for glyphosate
herbicide.
Saving seed

The saving by a farmer of a proportion
of the seed from his harvest for sowing
another crop in subsequent seasons. This
is a traditional practice carried out by
approximately 20–25 per cent of farmers,
mainly small farmers, in the US and UK.
Substantially equivalent

A term used to describe GM crops that have
similar levels of certain chemicals, usually
nutrients and toxins, to their non-GM
counterparts and are as a consequence
considered otherwise similar to the
non-GM crops by regulatory authorities.
This approach forms the basis for the
approval of GMOs and has been heavily
criticised for its use as a replacement to
full safety testing.

Additional charges that GM seed companies
add to the price of buying GM seeds.

Tort

Part of the civil law (as opposed to criminal)
where private citizens are able to sue each
other, corporate bodies or the state.
Transgenic

Genetically modified. See ‘GM’. Transgenes
refers to the foreign genes which have been
genetically engineered into a GM organism.
They may be found in non-GM plants
following cross-pollination with a GM variety.
USDA

United States Department of Agriculture,
the US ministry for agriculture.
Volunteers

Unwanted crop plants, that were either
planted in a previous season and failed to
germinate then or that grow from spilt seed
from a previous harvest.

A2 References
01

1. Introduction

01

Organic Food & Farming Report 2001, Soil Association, 2001
‘Special report – technology’, Wall Street Journal,
13 May 2002

02

01

2. Context

01

Global Review of Commercialized Transgenic Crops: 2001,
ISAAA briefs no. 24
‘GE crops – increasingly isolated as awareness and
rejection grow’, Greenpeace International briefing,
March 2002
‘Special report – technology’, Wall Street Journal,
13 May 2002
‘Prospective plantings’, National Agricultural Statistics
Service (NASS), 28 March 2002
McGuire D, American Corn Growers Association,
personal commmunication 13 June 2002
‘Proposed GM lawsuit may stir major waves’,
Western Producer, 18 October 2001
‘Western Canadian farmers growing more GM crops’,
The Leader-Post, 20 October 2001, (www.whybiotech.com/
en/ benefits/agriprod/con1343.asp?MID=41)
‘Supermarket sweep’, Splice, vol. 8, no. 2, March 2002

02

03

04

05

Superweeds

Wild or domestic plants that have
developed immunity to herbicides,
usually through gene transfer from GM
herbicide tolerant crops, meaning that they

06

07

08

64 SEEDS OF DOUBT

09
10

www.animalfeed.org.uk
Organic Food & Farming Report 2001, Soil Association, 2001

13
14

01

3. Yield

01

22

Shoemaker R (ed), ‘Economic Issues in Agricultural
Biotechnology’, Agriculture Information Bulletin, no. 762,
Economic Research Service of the USDA, February 2001
Advertisement in Top Producer, January 2002
(‘Asgrow’ is a trademark of Monsanto Company)
Monsanto Technology Use Guide, 2000
Duffy M & Ernst M, ‘Does planting GMO seed boost
farmers’ profits? (Fall 1999)’, Leopold Letter, vol. 11 no. 3
Elmore RW et al, ‘Glyphosate-resistant soybean cultivar
yields compared with sister lines’, Agronomy Journal,
93:408-412 (2001)
Benbrook C, ‘Troubled times amid commercial success for
Roundup Ready soybeans – Glyphosate efficacy is slipping
and unstable transgene expression erodes plant defenses
and yields’, AgBioTech InfoNet technical paper no. 4,
3 May 2001
www.btinternet.com/~nlpwessex, 31 May 1999
The Roundup Ready Soyabean System: Sustainability and
herbicide use, Monsanto, April 1998
Transgenic Crops: An Environmental Assessment,
Henry A Wallace Center for Agricultural and
Environmental Policy, November 2000
Benbrook C, ‘When does it pay to plant Bt corn?
Farm-level economic impacts of Bt corn 1996–2001’,
www.iatp.org
Benbrook C, Premium Paid for Bt Corn Seed Improves
Corporate Finances While Eroding Grower Profits, Benbrook
Consulting Services, Sandpoint, Idaho, February 2002
Fulton M & Keyowski L, ‘The producer benefits of
herbicide-resistant canola’, AgBioForum, vol. 2, no. 2, 1999,
(www.agbioforum.missouri.edu)
The Performance of Field-Released Transgenic Crops,
USDA Economic Research Service
Benbrook C, personal communication, 4 June 2002
Mayer S, GeneWatch UK, personal communication,
May 2002
Benbrook C, ‘A perspective on actual versus potential
environmental benefits of agricultural biotechnology’,
case statement for the Pew initiative on food and
biotechnology meeting, 4 February 2002
King C, Purcell L & Vories E, ‘Plant growth and
nitrogenase activity of glyphosate-tolerant soybeans in
response to foliar application’, Agronomy Journal, vol 93,
p 179–186, 2001 (abstract at http://biotech-info.net/
king_abstract.pdf)
Griffiths M, personal communication, 4 June 2002
Interview with Michael Alberts, 27 January 2002
Crop Choice News, 29 September 2001
www.mslawyer.com/mssc/ctapp/20010925/0000137.html
Holkup G, personal communication, 2 February 2002

01

4. Agrochemical use

01

‘RR beans and increasing herbicide use’,
http://members.tripod.com/~ngin, 11 December 2000
‘GMO’s: farm policy, patent laws, contamination, trade.
Interview with Bill Christison’, In Motion, 31 May 2001
Benbrook C, ‘Do GM Crops mean less pesticide use?’
Pesticide Outlook, October 2001 (www.rsc.org/is/journals/
current/pest/pohome.htm)
Duffy M, ‘Who benefits from biotechnology?’,
presentation at the American Seed Trade Association
meeting, December 2001
Benbrook C, ‘Troubled times amid commercial success for
Roundup Ready soybeans – Glyphosate efficacy is slipping
and unstable transgene expression erodes plant defenses
and yields’, AgBioTech InfoNet technical paper no. 4,
3 May 2001
Owen M D K (Iowa State University), ‘North American
developments in herbicide tolerant crops’, British Crop
Protection Conference, Brighton, England, 1997
(www.weeds.iastate.edu/weednews/Brighton.htm)
The Roundup Ready Soyabean System: Sustainability and
herbicide use, Monsanto, April 1998
Newsnight, BBC2, 26 June 2002
‘Impact of transgenic canola on growers, industry and
environment’, www.canola council.org/manual/GMO/
gmo~main.htm
‘Western Canadian farmers growing more GM crops’,
The Leader-Post, 20 October 2001, (www.whybiotech.com/
en/ benefits/agriprod/con1343.asp?MID=41)
Mendelson J, ‘Roundup: The world’s biggest-selling
herbicide’, The Ecologist, vol. 28, no. 5,
September/October 1998
Nottingham S, Genescapes, The Ecology of Genetic

02

03
04

05

06

07
08

09

10

11

12

13

14
15

16

17

18
19
20
21

15

16

17
18

19

20

21

22
23

24

25

26

27

28

29
30

31

01

5. Farmer income

01

12

www.nffc.net
Advertisement in Top Producer, January 2002
(‘Asgrow’ is a Monsanto trademark)
Duffy M, ‘Who benefits from biotechnology?’,
presentation at the American Seed Trade Association
meeting, December 2001
Benbrook C, ‘When does it pay to plant Bt corn?
Farm-level economic impacts of Bt corn, 1996–2001’,
www.iatp.org
‘Impact of transgenic canola on growers, industry and
environment’, www.canola-council.org/manual/GMO/
gmo-main.htm
Interim Report on Improving the Regulation of Genetically
Modified Foods and other Novel Foods in Canada,
www.cbac.gc.ca. 23 August 2001
Benbrook C, personal communication, 13 June 2002
2000 Technology Use Guide, Monsanto
Benbrook C, personal communication, 4 June 2002
Bullock D & Nitsi E I, GMO ‘Adoption and private cost
savings: GR soybeans and Bt corn’, in Nelson G (editor)
Genetically Modified Organisms in Agriculture, Economics and
Politics, Academic Press, 2001
‘2001 state elevator survey’, www.acga.org
Interview with Mark & Susan Fitzgerald, 5 February 2002

01

6. Herbicide resistant volunteers

01

CBC news and current affairs, 21 June 2001
Canadian Bar Association’s annual conference,
August 2001
‘Herbicide resistance is out of control says canola farmers’,
Crop Choice News, 15 August 2000 (www.cropchoice.com)
‘Western Canadian farmers growing more GM crops,
The Leader-Post, 20 October 2001 (www.whybiotech.com/
en/benefits/agriprod/con1343.asp?MID=41
GM volunteer canola causes havoc, The Western Producer,
6 September 2001
Clark AE, University of Guelph, ‘The implications
of the Schmeiser decision’, www.percyschmeiser.com/
crime.htm
Fehr W R, ‘Strategies for the coexistence of GMO,
non-GMO, and organic crop production’, presentation
to the Sustainable Agriculture Colloquium at Iowa State
University, 24 September 2001

02

03

04

05

02

03

04

05

06

07

08
09

10

11

12

Engineering, Zed Books, 2002
Pesticide News, no. 41, September 1998
Pesticide News, no. 42, December 1998
Mississippi State University Extension Service Agronomy Notes,
March 2002
Mississippi State University Extension Service Agronomy Notes,
April 2002
Benbrook C, personal communication, 4 June 2002
‘Fantastic year for waterhemp, an aggressive weed,
is bad news for soybean farmers, say MU agronomists’,
University of Missouri press release, 20 June 2001
(http://agebb.missouri.edu/news/queries/showarc.idc?
story_num=1226&iln=412)
‘Soil erosion in agricultural systems’, (www.msu.edu/user/
dunnjef1/rd491/soile.htm, description of no-till)
Benbrook C, ‘When does it pay to plant Bt corn?
Farm-level economic impacts of Bt corn, 1996–2001’,
www.iatp.org
‘Grower planting intentions for GM crops’,
USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2002
Advertisement in The Independent, 8 August 1998
Obrycki J L et al, ‘Beyond insecticidal toxicity to ecological
complexity’, BioScience, vol. 51, no. 5, May 2001
‘Union of concerned scientists comments to the
Environmental Protection Agency on the renewal
of Bt-crop registrations’, www.biotech-info.net,
10 September 2001
‘GM damages environment but not pests, says study’,
The Guardian, 8 June 2002
www.biotech-info.net/Cotton_agronomic_problemscosts.html
Do Genetically-Engineered (GE) Crops Reduce Pesticides?
The emerging evidence says ‘not likely’, WWF special report,
March 2000
‘Bt corn insect resistance management survey, 2000
growing season’, Agricultural Biotechnology Stewardship
Technical Committee, 31 January 2001
www.pioneer.com/biotech/irm/acre%5Fcalculator.htm
Brasher P, ‘Farmers violating biotech corn rules’,
Associated Press, 31 January 2001
Huang F et al (1999), ‘Inheritance of resistance to
Bacillus thuringiensis toxin in the European corn borer’,
Science 284: 965-967

06

07
08
09
10

11

02

03

04

05

06

07

SEEDS OF DOUBT 65

08

09

10

11

12
13

14

15

16
17

18

19

20

21

Study Regarding Environmental Safety and Biotechnology,
The Council for Biotechnology Information,
8 February 2001 (http://www.whybiotech.com/
en/mediaupd/con682.asp?MID=19)
‘Gene stacking in herbicide tolerant oilseed rape: lessons
from the North American experience’, English Nature
Research Reports, no. 443, January 2002
‘Zero-till farmers air Roundup Ready concerns’,
The Western Producer, 6 December 2001
Beckie H, personal communication, taken from ‘Gene
stacking in herbicide tolerant oilseed rape: lessons from
the North American experience’, English Nature Research
Reports, no. 443, January 2002
New Scientist, 24 November 2001
SCIMAC guidelines, http://www.ukasta.org.uk/scimac/
gui8.html
‘Chemical and other safety information. The physical and
theoretical chemistry laboratory’, Oxford University
(http://physchem.ox.ac.uk/MSDS/)
‘New Canadian scare: genes from genetically
engineered crops creating herbicide resistant weeds’,
The Globe and Mail, 15 June 2000
The Western Producer, 10 February 2000
Hall L M & Topinka K, ‘Pollen flow between herbicide
tolerant canola (Brassica napus) is the cause of multiple
resistant canola volunteers’, WSSA Abstracts, 2000 Meeting
of the Weed Society of America, vol. 40, 2000
Warwick H, ‘Agent Orange: The poisoning of Vietnam’,
The Ecologist, vol. 28, no. 5, September/October 1998
‘Monsanto sees opportunity in glyphosate resistant
volunteer weeds’, www.cropchoice.com, 3 August 2001
Goodman R M & Newell N (1985), ‘Genetic engineering
of plants for herbicide resistance: status and prospects’, in
Halvorson H O, Pramer D & Rogul M (editors), Engineered
Organisms in the Environment: Scientific Issues, American
Society for Microbiology, Washington DC, p 47–53
Ellstrand M C, ‘When transgenes wander, should we
worry?’, Plant Physiology, vol. 125, p 1543–1545, April 2001

27

28
29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36
37

38
39

40

41
42

43
44

Environmental Protection Agency on the renewal
of Bt-crop registrations’, www.biotech-info.net,
10 September 2001
‘Genetically modified organisms (GMOs): the significance
of gene flow through pollen transfer’, Environmental issue
report, no. 28, EEA, Copenhagen, 2002
Interview with Rodney Nelson, 31 January 2002
From debate at Northern Plains Sustainable Agriculture
Society winter meeting, Mandan, North Dakota,
2 February 2002
Riddle J A, ‘Ten strategies to minimize risks of GMO
contamination’, Organic Independents, Winona, MN
Moeller D, ‘GMO liability threats for farmers’,
Farmers’ Legal Action Group, November 2001
Lin W, Price G & Allen E (2001), ‘StarLink: impacts on
the US corn market and world trade’, Feed Yearbook,
Economic Research Service/USDA, April 2001
Environment News Service (http://ens-news.com),
18 June 2001
‘Life-threatening food?’, http://www.cbsnews.com/
stories/2001/05/17/eveningnews/main291992.shtml
Scientific Advisory Panel, SAP report no. 2000-06,
1 December 2001 (www.epa.gov/scipoly/sap/)
Greenpeace, press release, 16 November 2000
Corporate Watch Newsletter, no. 6, November/December
2001 (http://www.corporatewatch.org.uk/newsletter
/issue6/nl6_bayer_hazzard.html)
Interview with Gale Lush, 27 January 2002
‘FDA holds Oakland hearing to discuss genetic labelling’,
Oakland Tribune, 14 December 1999
‘Western Canadian Farmers Growing More GM Crops’,
The Leader-Post, 20 October 2001, (www.whybiotech.com/
en/ benefits/agriprod/con1343.asp?MID=41)
Interview with Randy Jones, 1 February 2002
‘GM pollution now pervasive’, www.theage.com.au/news/
2001/04/30/FFXGG3PO3MC.html, 30 April 2001
2001 state elevator survey, www.acga.org
McGuire D, personal communication, 15 June 2002

01

7. Contamination

01

8. Unpredicted effects

01

McGuire D, Presentation to 2002 Annual Convention of
the American Corn Growers Association, 9 March 2002
Saskatchewan Organic Directorate, presentation to the
Canadian House of Commons, standing committee on
agriculture and agri-food, 29 January 2002
‘GM pollution now pervasive’, www.theage.com.au/news/
2001/04/30/FFXGG3PO3MC.html, 30 April 2001
‘GM volunteer canola causes havoc’, The Western Producer,
6 September 2001
Friends of the Earth, press release, 4 May 2002
(www.foe.co.uk/pubsinfo/infoteam/pressrel/2002)
‘Firms move to avoid risk of contamination’, The Times,
29 May 2000
The Western Producer, 10 May 2001
‘Monsanto concerned unapproved canola could
appear in US supplies’, Associated Press, 16 April 2002
(http://enn.com/news/wire-stories/2002/04/04162002/
ap_46944.asp)
Statement of claim in the court of the Queen’s Bench,
Judicial Centre of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
10 January 2002
Interview with Ian Cushon, 2 February 2002
‘Transgenic contamination and seeds fact sheet’,
www.npsas.org/GMOfactsheet.html
The Western Producer, 3 May 2001
‘Gene stacking in herbicide tolerant oilseed rape: lessons
from the North American experience’, English Nature
Research Reports, no. 443, January 2002
Fehr W R, ‘Strategies for the coexistence of GMO,
non-GMO, and organic crop production’, presentation
to the Sustainable Agriculture Colloquium at Iowa State
University, 24 September 2001
The Western Producer, 24 April 1997
Interview with Tom & Gail Wiley, 30 January 2002
Loiselle M, personal communication, 3 April 2002
Interview with Mark & Susan Fitzgerald, 5 February 2002
Interview with Roger & Amy Lansink, 26 January 2002
Lansink A, personal communication, 5 April 2002
Interview with David Vetter, 2 February 2002
Statement of claim in the court of the Queen’s Bench,
Judicial Centre of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
10 January 2002
Interview with Derek Crompton (SK Food International
crop production manager), 1 February 2002
Interview with Kevin Kvamme (Earthwise plant manager)
1 February 2002
Survey of 10 US certifiers, Soil Association, June 2002
‘Union of Concerned Scientists comments to the

01

Harper Magazine, press release, 15 January 2001
(article by Commoner Dr B, ‘Unravelling the DNA
myth: the spurious foundations of genetic engineering’)
The Iowa Farm Bureau Spokesman, editions 29 April and
13 May 2002
Interview with Gale Lush, 27 January 2002
Interview with Gary Smith, 1 February 2002
Interview with Tom Wiley, 30 January 2002
Interview with Mark & Susan Fitzgerald, 5 February 2002
Interview with Tim Eisenbeis, 1 February 2002
Interview with Roger Lansink, 26 January 2002
Sprinkel S, ‘When the corn hits the fan’, Acres USA,
special report, 18 September 1999
The Iowa Farm Bureau Spokesman, 29 April 2002
‘Splitting headache, Monsanto's modified soya beans are
cracking up in the heat’, New Scientist, 20 November 1999
‘Bad news beans – a year of challenges confronts
soybean growers’, press release, University of Missouri,
27 July 2001 (http://agebb.missouri.edu/news/queries/
showcur.idc?story_num+1272&iln=419)
University of Missouri, news release, 5 February 2001
Pribyl L (scientific adviser on the FDA microbiology
group), internal memorandum on FDA document
Statement of policy: food from genetically modified plants,
6 March 1992 (http://www.biointegrity.org/FDAdocs/
04index.html)
The Royal Society of Canada’s expert panel on the future
of biotechnology (http://www.rsc.ca/foodbiotechnology/
GMreportEN.pdf)
http://www.biointegrity.org/list.html
AgBioview, 19 August 2001 (www.agbioworld.org)
ISB News, July 2001 (www.isb.vt.edu/news/2001/
news01.Jul.html)
Dale et al (1998), ‘Transgene expression and stability in
Brassica’, ACTA Horticulturae, no. 459, p 167–171
Pusztai A, ‘Genetically modified foods: are they a risk to
human health?’, www.actionbioscience.org/biotech/
pusztai.html#Primer, June 2001
‘Feeding transgenic crops to livestock’, Monsanto,
Scientific Affairs, 20 December 2001

02

03

04

05

06

07
08

09

10
11

12
13

14

15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

23

24

25
26

02

03
04
05
06
07
08
09

10
11

12

13
14

15

16
17
18

19

20

21

01

9. Farmer choice

01

Interview with Gale Lush, 27 January 2002
Interview with Sharon Rempel, 2 February 2002
Sams C, personal communication, 14 July 2002
‘The five gene giants are becoming four: DuPont and
Monsanto – living in sinergy?’ ETC Group, news release,
9 April 2002

02
03
04

66 SEEDS OF DOUBT

07

Interview with Jim Stiegelmeier, 29 January 2002
‘Farmer fights suit by biotech company’,
The Journal Gazette, 8 July 2001
Farm News, 13 July 2001, via www.roushfarms.com

01

10. National farm economy

01

‘GE crops – increasingly isolated as awareness and
rejection grow’, Greenpeace International, briefing,
March 2002
‘Corn growers concerned trade legislation will backfire’,
PRNewswire, 17 January 2002
Conrad K (North Dakota US Senator), personal
communication (to Rodney Nelson), 5 February 2001
‘Farmers are deeply wary about genetically engineered
crops’, The Environmental Magazine, 28 March 2002
www.monsanto.com.au/canola/marketing.htm
Schmeiser P, letter to Tony Blair PM, published in ‘Aventis
faulted on claims’, Des Moines Register, 27 February 2001’,
25 October 2000
McGuire D, presentation to 2002 Annual Convention of
the American Corn Growers’ Association, 9 March 2002
McGuire D, personal communication, 5 June 2002
Saskatoon Star Phoenix, 11 February 2002
Branford S, ‘Sow resistant’, The Guardian, 17 April 2002
‘Let’s make sure OSR is well supported’, Farmers’ Weekly,
17 May 2002
‘Groups oppose approval of genetically modified wheat’,
press release signed by over 210 groups, 31 July 2001
Paarlerg R, ‘Shrinking international markets for GM
crops’, presentation to USDA Agricultural Outlook
Forum, February 2001
‘Labelling GM foods’, Postnote, no. 172, February 2002
Kechkin V, www.btinternet.com/~nlpwessex, 25 July 2000
‘Market likely to direct GM food future, UPI Science News,
20 January 2001
Fehr W R, ‘Strategies for the coexistence of GMO,
non-GMO, and organic crop production’, presentation
to the Sustainable Agriculture Colloquium at Iowa State
University, 24 September 2001
‘News update’, www.thecampaign.org, Campaign to Label
Genetically Engineered Foods, 24 May 2002
‘Rock wants mandatory labels on GM food’, National Post,
5 October 2001
Presentation by US farmers (organised by the Small and
Family Farm Alliance), Hereford, 20 March 2002
‘Rejected GM food dumped on the poor’,
Independent on Sunday, 18 June 2000
‘GMOs found in food aid to Latin America, Seedling,
GRAIN (Genetic Resources Action International),
June 2001
‘Illegal genetically engineered StarLink corn contaminates
food aid’, press release from Genetically Engineered Food
Alert, 10 June 2002
Edwards C & DeHaven T, ‘Farm subsidies at record levels
as Congress considers new Farm Bill’, Cato Institute Briefing
Paper No. 70, 18 October 2001
Fischler F, ‘EU and US farm policies – where do they
differ and where do they converge?’, speech, Washington,
17 May 2001
Farm Programs: Information on Recipients of Federal Payments,
US General Accounting Office, GAO–01–606, June 2001
‘Brazil brings EU and US before WTO over farm
subsidies’, Agencia Efe, 26 February 2002 (www.iatp.org)
Biotechnology Industry Organisation (BIO), www.bio.org
Cato institute, www.cato.org
Benbrook C, Premium Paid for Bt Corn Seed Improves
Corporate Finances While Eroding Grower Profits, Benbrook
Consulting Services, Sandpoint Idaho, February 2002
Benbrook C, personal communication, 4 June 2002
‘$180 billion farm aid trade threat’, Australian Financial
Review, 10 May 2002

15

01

11. Legal issues

12

01

Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy, press release,
4 December 2001 (www.iatp.org)
www.percyschmeiser.com
Interview with Rodney Nelson, 31 January 2002
Schubert R, ‘Monsanto sues Nelson farm: A North Dakota
family’s frustrations with genetically engineered soybeans’,
Farm News from CropChoice.com, 16 May 2001
Moeller D, ‘GMO liability threats for farmers’, Farmers’
Legal Action Group, November 2001 (www.iatp.org)
Monsanto, press release, 29 September 1998
Telephone interview, 4 February 2002
The Times, 20 February 2002
Complete copy of letter available at
www.nelsonfarm.net/zielinskiletter.htm
Nelson R, personal communication, 1 April 2002

05
06

11

12
13
14

02

03

04

05
06

07

08
09
10
11

12

13

14
15
16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28
29
30

31
32

02
03
04

05

06
07
08
09

10

16
17

18

19
20

21

22

23

24

25
26

27
28
29

30
31

32

33

Clark AE, University of Guelph, ‘The implications of the
Schmeiser decision’, www.percyschmeiser.com/crime.htm
Crop Choice News, 26 October 2001
Interview with Jim Stiegelmeier, 30 January 2002
Jones P, ‘Litigation in the wind’, ISB Newsreport,
April 2002
Saskatchewan Organic Directorate (SOD), press release,
10 January 2002 (www.saskorganic.com)
Crop Choice News, 6 October 2001
‘Legal battles involving GMO crops likely to increase’,
Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy, press release,
4 December 2001 (www.iatp.org)
‘Aventis Settles StarLink Lawsuit’, Chemical Week,
20 March 2002
Monsanto Technology Use Guide, 2000
Fehr W R, ‘Strategies for the coexistence of GMO,
non-GMO, and organic crop production’, presentation
to the Sustainable Agriculture Colloquium at Iowa State
University, 24 September 2001
‘Farmers are deeply wary about genetically engineered
crops’, The Environmental Magazine, 28 March 2002
Saskatchewan Organic Directorate, presentation to the
Canadian House of Commons, standing committee on
agriculture and agri-food, 29 January 2002
‘Groups oppose approval of genetically modified wheat’,
press release signed by over 210 groups, 31 July 2001
‘GE crops – increasingly isolated as awareness and
rejection grow’, Greenpeace International, briefing,
March 2002
Interview with John Koskan, 29 January 2002
‘NFU adopts GMO policies’, AgWeb News, 13 March 2001
(www.nfu.org)
AgBioview, 19 August 2001
Crop Choice News, 6 May 2002
‘GM wheat panned by Canadian consumers’, Reuters,
1 August 2001
Mayer S, personal communication, 8 May 2002
McGuire D, presentation to 2002 Annual Convention of
the American Corn Growers’ Association, 9 March 2002
‘Farmers fight introduction of Roundup Ready wheat in
Canada’, Crop Choice News, 30 July 2001
‘Kucinich introduces bills to label genetically modified
food and protect consumers’, www.thecampaign.org/
cosponsor.htm, 22 May 2002

01

12. Discussion

01

Interview with John Koskan, 29 January 2002
Soil Association figure, consisting of $3–5 billion annually
in extra farm subsidies, £2 billion in lost foreign trade
and $1 billion cost of the StarLink accident.
Scenarios for Co-existence of Genetically Modified, Conventional
and Organic Crops in European Agriculture, report
from the Joint Research Centre commissioned
by Agriculture Directorate-General, January 2002
(http://www.jrc.cec.eu.int/GECrops/)
Presentation by US farmers (organised by the Small and
family Farm Alliance) Hereford, UK, 20 March 2002
‘Western Canadian farmers growing more GM crops’,
The Leader-Post, 20 October 2001 (www.whybiotech.com.
en/benefits/agripod/con1343.asp?MID=41)
‘Drug company owns Monsanto and their weed killer is
what funds GMO crops’, http://www.mercola.com/2001/
aug/8/gmo_crops.htm
Mendelson J, ‘The world’s biggest-selling herbicide’,
The Ecologist, vol. 28, no. 5, September/October 1998
Genescapes, The Ecology of Genetic Engineering,
Stephen Nottingham. Published by Zed Books. 2002
Monbiot G, Captive State, The Corporate Takeover of Britain,
Macmillan, 2000
Hansard, 21 July 1999
‘Biotech’s cash benefits may not be what they seem’,
New Scientist, 22 June 2002 (www.newscientist.com)
Benbrook C, ‘Troubled times amid commercial success for
Roundup Ready soybeans – glyphosate efficacy is slipping
and unstable transgene expression erodes plant defenses
and yields’. AgBioTech InfoNet Technical Paper No. 4,
3 May 2001
‘Consumers demand ‘full’ GM labelling’,
Farmers’ Guardian, 14 June 2002
Policy Commission on Farming and Food in England –
submission from the Food Standards Agency, background
paper 2, November 2001.
Organic Food & Farming Report 2001, Soil Association, 2001
www.defra.gov.uk

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

09

10
11

13

14

15
16

SEEDS OF DOUBT 67

Acknowledgements

Seeds of doubt

• Researched and written by Hugh Warwick
and Gundula Meziani
• Photographed by Hugh Warwick
• Funded by a grant from the Greenpeace
Environmental Trust.
Thank you to all those who have commented
on drafts of this report: Paul Adams,
Dr Michael Antoniou, Dr Charles Benbrook,
Alissa Cook, Sue Flook, Mark Griffiths,
Robert Haward, Adrian Long, Dr Sue Mayer,
Peter Melchett, Dan McGuire, Craig Sams
and Elisabeth Winkler. Design by Ian Parfitt.
Printed by Beshara Press, Tewkesbury.

Soil Association

The Soil Association is a membership
charity which was founded in 1946 by a
group of farmers, scientists and nutritionists
who were concerned about the way food
was produced. It is at the centre of the
campaign for safe, healthy food, an
unpolluted countryside and a sustainable
farming policy in Britain and worldwide.
The organisation has now grown
in scope and complexity but the core
principle is essentially simple; there are
direct links between the health of the soil,
plants, animals and humans, and organic
agriculture is a sustainable system of food
production which is based on these
interconnections: healthy soil, healthy
food, healthy people.
To achieve this end, the Soil Association
is working in many different areas:
• Policy. Working to achieve change in
food and farming systems through
lobbying and policy work.
• Campaigns. Joining forces with members,
supporters and other like minded groups
to campaign for the elimination of GMOs
from the food chain; promoting the
responsible use of antibiotics in farming;
working in partnership with conservation
agencies to protect wildlife and
biodiversity.
• Setting organic standards to ensure
the integrity of organic food and other
products. Soil Association Certification Ltd
(SA Cert), a subsidiary company, runs the

certification scheme used by 80 per cent
of UK licensed operators and awards the
Soil Association symbol.
• Providing professional, technical support
to farmers and growers with the aim of
increasing the amount of land farmed
organically and providing more jobs in
the countryside.
• Promoting organic food so that people
everywhere will have the opportunity to
buy and eat organic food, be it from a
local market, a box scheme, a corner
shop or a supermarket.
The Soil Association provides modern,
practical solutions to the challenges
facing society today.

Soil Association
Bristol House
40–56 Victoria Street
Bristol BS1 6BY, UK
T 0117 929 0661
F 0117 925 2504
E info@soilassociation.org
www.soilassociation.org

Price £12.00
ISBN 0 905200 89 6
© Soil Association, September 2002
Registered charity no. 206862
 Year in and year out farmers are losing the seeds from their own plants, and are forced to purchase them anew from seed providers. Monsanto has monopolized the seed market which has significantly limited the variety of plants available on the market. The consequences of which have had fatal effects on both our environment, and the farmers that harness crops from it. 
 The seed industry is more concentrated today than it ever was before. The ten largest seed corporations dominate three quarters of the commercial seed market. The top three of these, Monsanto, DuPont and Syngenta, represent more than half (53 percent) of the market.  Even more striking are the figures of genetically modified (GM) seeds - according to Greenpeace, Monsanto sold 90 percent of GM seeds worldwide in 2009. 
 There are however regional differences. While agriculture in industrialized countries is predominantly sourced from commercial seed providers, many developing countries are still relatively independent of these, for now. The portion of commercial seeds present in Indian agriculture is approximately 30 percent, and Africa as a whole has less than 10%. 
 Although one third may not sound like a game-changing figure, the commercial seed market and Monsanto in particular have had a devastating effect on Indian farmers. Cotton farmers especially have been strained as Monsanto controls 95 percent of the cotton seed market through its genetically modified organisms (GMOs). 
 How did We Get Here? From the Farm to the Corporation 
 Behind the growing domination of commercial seeds in developed and developing countries is a story of agricultural changes, targeted company merges and take-overs, the use of patenting and legal frameworks. 
 To understand how a handful of agro-businesses were able to gain mass control over something as basic as seeds in agriculture, we have to look back. Traditionally seeds made a full circle, after harvest a portion of the seeds were preserved for the following year and the cycle was never interrupted. 
 Agriculture began to become industrialized at the beginning of the 1950s and this only intensified in the 1960s and 1970s. As a result, production processes became increasingly mechanized and rationalized. In many regions of the world the so called ‘Green Revolution’ was introduced with the aim of significantly increasing crop yields and warding off a crisis of widespread food insecurity. 
 To comply with these new modes of intensified industrial agriculture, farms needed to become larger and preform more specialized tasks. Agriculture as we know it has significantly changed from what it previously was, as have the markets within it. Specific markets for stockbreeding, seeds, animal feed, fertilizers, and pesticides emerged. In such a system, farmers no longer produce their crops autonomously, but merely become members of a production chain. 
 As agricultural mega corporations, like Monsanto and co, entered on the stage, middle-sized farms and businesses were forced to exit. These transnational corporations were able to expand by buying out others, or merging their businesses. As a result the competition in the agricultural economy began to dwindle, and with it the variation of seeds on offer and fair pricing for them. Additionally, the corporations that are responsible for producing seeds are in many cases also the providers of the pesticides that accompany the seeds they sell. Both the seeds and the pesticides are aimed at raking in the greatest possible profit, and this scheme is applied best by Monsanto. 
 What are the big corporations like Monsanto offering? Farmers become hooked hearing that with high performance seeds they will be able to gain much greater crop yields, which will grow robustly and with enhanced resistance to pests, as well be efficiently and cost effectively harvested with machines. To really take business to the next level, further increase their yields and maximize their profits, there are hybrid seed varieties. 
 As Genius as it is Fatal: Hybrid Seeds 
 Since the inception of agriculture, farmers have always saved a portion of their harvest to select seeds with which they could sow for the next growing season, or trade with their neighbor. In many countries across the world this reuse of seeds remains common practice. However from the perspective of seed engineers and providers, replanting the gains of their seeds or trading these seeds would mean losing potential customers. And that is what makes hybrid seeds so ingenious. 
 The first harvest of hybrid varieties, with the optimal irrigation, fertilizer and pesticides, yields may increase by 15 –  30 percent. However the second generation of these seeds does not yield the same thing, instead it develops into a multitude of plant forms. Therefore re-planting hybrid seeds is not possible and farmers are forced to repurchase seeds every season. For the seed distributors this is truly genius, their business is protected and engineered into the very product they sell. 
 It is said that hybrid seeds are applied to gain high yields, produce more pest and disease resistant crops, which are, technically speaking, much more easily harvested. Critics however find that these results may also be realized with natural seed varieties, and are concerned with questions of the quality of the crops being produced, the high costs required to produce them, the dwindling diversity of crops in existence, and the growing dependency on large seed corporations for hybrid plants. 
 In the USA and countries across Europe a handful of large corporations have formed a firm grip on the market. The monopoly control they have gained is problematic for the following reasons according to the International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development (IAASTD): 
 The monopoly power leads to the concentration of research and development being invested into only a small number of seed varieties 
 Concentrated market control may also prevent other firms from entering the seed economy which may be able to offer alternative products and business model 
 The competition stifling effects of a dominated market place may lead to massive hikes in the prices for seeds. Since the introduction genetic modification of organisms the prices for cotton seeds in the United States has risen three to four fold. Substantial increases in the price for cotton seeds can also be seen in developing countries. 
 The picture of market power, hybrid seeds and rigorous patenting of seeds has had fatal consequences in countries located in the global South. 
 Monsanto in India 
 Vandana Shiva is an Indian activist, author, and founder of the Research Foundation for Science, Technology and Ecology and argues that Monsanto’s monopoly of seeds in India has become the root cause of the increase in farmer suicides. In an article published on Aljazeera, Shiva argues that “Monsanto and its PR men are trying desperately to delink the epidemic of farmers suicides in India from its growing control over the cotton seed supply. For us it is the control over seed, the first link in the food chain, the source of life which is our biggest concern. When a corporation controls seed, it controls life. Including the life of our farmers.” 
 Monsanto has had a presence in India since 1988 when the World Bank introduced a new Seed Policy that required the government to deregulate the seed sector, one of the many measures accompanied by the Structural Readjustment Policies. Shiva identifies five significant changes that have arisen since Monsanto entered the Indian seed market: 
 Indian companies became bound to Monsanto through joint ventures and licensing arrangements, which enabled it to secure a strong grip over the sector 
 The Monsanto seeds were defined as ‘intellectual property’, which meant that Monsanto could collect royalties – these are an agreed-upon percentage of the gross or net revenues earned or a fixed price of the harvests. 
 Furthermore the seeds which were once a renewable resource became non-renewable because the natural, open-pollinated cotton seeds were replaced by patented hybrids and GMOs. 
 Cotton, which could previously be grown in harmony with other crops, became a monocrop which was more vulnerable to pests, diseases, drought and crop failure and more dependent on expensive pesticides and fertilizers. 
 And lastly Monsanto began to subvert government regulatory processes and even gained access to public resources to promote non-renewable hybrids and GMOs through ‘public private partnerships’ or PPP. 
 Shiva goes on to say that “the creation of seed monopolies, the destruction of alternatives, the collection of superprofits in the form of royalties, and the increasing vulnerability of monocultures has created a context for debt, suicides, and agrarian distress.” 
 For years she has been opposed to Monsanto’s monopoly power in India. Thanks to having bullied, and bought out their competition, it almost wholly controls the cotton production. As a result Indian cotton farmers do not have an alternative to Monsanto’s genetically modified plants. 
 However for the majority of farmers the seeds are more than they can afford, and the yields lie substantially below expectations. Further problematizing the situation are the new diseases which have been cropping up and damaging the cotton plants, or completely ruining the harvest. 
 In contrast to the traditional cotton plants that are suited to weather and soil conditions of the regions in which they grow, the genetically modified plants have not adapted to the climate. Additionally costly, health-damaging and environmentally unfriendly fertilizers and pesticides need to be used in order to protect the mutant crops. 
 A vast number of Indian farmers have been financially ruined and indebted thanks to Monsanto, some have even turned to suicide seeing no other way out. Nearly 75 percent of rural debt in India is attributed to purchased inputs according to the Government of India. As farmer debt grows, so does Monsanto’s profits and it is in this system that their seeds have been given the name “seeds of suicide”. Shiva notes, “the price per kilogram of cotton seeds [has gone] from 7 to 17,000 rupees…Monsanto sells its GMO seeds on fraudulent claims of yields of 1500 kg/year when farmers harvest 300-400 kg/year on an average.” 
 For years large seed corporations have flooded the markets of developing countries, in which the presence of commercial seed providers was small. Whilst infiltrating these economies, they have played to the hope that through seed growth and genetic engineering miraculous solutions to global problems, such as climate change, can be found. However the data supports a different story, according to FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) approximately half of the 868 million people suffering from hunger worldwide are resource-deprived farmers who farm on small plots of fertile land. 
 Despite this, massive seed corporations invest a meager 1 percent of their research and development budget into seeds that are appropriate for the climate of many developing countries. Simultaneously, they are able to prevent competitors from catering to these markets by acquiring strict patents on genes which are stress and heat resistant, which in turn assures that any corporations wishing to enter the market need to first align themselves with them. 
 Olivier De Schutter, who compiled a report titled ‘Seed policy and the right to food’ for the Right to Food program of the United Nations, stated that to combat poverty and hunger in the global South it is important that small scale, subsistence farmers have access to seeds. Through informal networks and local structures these can be sold, traded and appropriately developed for the climactic, ecological and cultural needs. 
 As a result of a monopolized seed economy and the limited engineering of seed varieties, the overall loss of plant diversity has significantly increased. Over the course of the 20th century, according to the FAO, approximately 75 percent of crop diversity has been lost. Before the Green Revolution in India there were roughly 50,000 rice varieties, and within twenty years this number dropped to a mere 40 - 40 from 50,000. Many of the new hybrid variations being created would not be able to keep up considering they share many genetic characteristics. 
 It sounds like a lot of loss looking at these figures, but is it really so important to preserve crop diversity? It is, because diversity entails countless genetic characteristics which may serve as viable options to be grown in the face of climate change. Let us not forget that our environment is drastically changing and with it our agricultural practices, or at least what we plant, may need to change as well. If climate conditions change it may be that an old variety of plant might be more suitable. For example, in the 1970s a large amount of rice harvests in India were destroyed by a virus. However, of the 6,273 remaining rice varieties there was one which was resistant to the virus. 
 A major UN and World Bank sponsored report which compiled the knowledge of 400 scientists and was endorsed by 58 countries concluded that genetically modified crops have little to offer to the challenges of poverty, hunger, and climate change. Better alternatives are available, and the report championed organic farming as the sustainable way forward. 
 It’s Time to Get Busy 
 It is a cause for concern that a handful of seed corporations dominate the seed market, and, subsequently, the foundations of our food production system. 
 If you want to become more active on this issue, why not start with signing some petitions? 
 Care2, a petition site is calling on Monsanto to intervene in the crisis of farmer suicides by providing financial assistance to farmers suffering from otherwise inescapable debt, sign if you want it to as well. 
 The online activism organization Avaaz is leading a petition against Monsanto expanding its patent right, read more about it here. 
 If this topic interests you, you may be interested in seeing Dirty White Gold a documentary by Leah Borromeo which aims to shed light on how the global fashion industry and international consumer habits contribute to the lives and deaths of Indian farmers by examining the cotton supply chain. 
 Bitter Seeds (http://www.itvs.org/films/bitter-seeds), directed by Micha Peled, follows the story of a teenage girl whose father took his life because of insurmountable debt. It poignantly shows Monsanto’s dishonest dealings with farmers and their consequences. 
 Indigenous Peoples affirm that their food sovereignty and relationships with their traditional foods cannot be separated from their cultures, languages, social life, spirituality, and total identity. In 2002, over 140 Indigenous Peoples, including traditional food producers and knowledge holders from all regions of the world, met in Sololá, Guatemala, adopting The Declaration of Atitlan. The Declaration defines food sovereignty as a collective and intergenerational right based on traditional knowledge and practices and the lands, waters, seeds, plants, animals, and natural cycles that sustain them. 
 Indigenous Peoples have identified climate change, along with environmental contamination, loss of traditional knowledge, and lack of access to traditional lands and resources as urgent threats to their food sovereignty. They are increasingly asserting their rights to control, protect, and restore their traditional food systems and sources to assure their future survival. 
 On August 12–13, 2016 in Shiprock, New Mexico, the Shiprock Chapter of the Navajo Nation and the International Indian Treaty Council co-hosted a gathering for Food Sovereignty and Climate Change Resiliency focusing on protecting, defending, and restoring traditional knowledge, seeds, and practices. There were 127 registered participants from the Diné, Yaqui, Opata, Southern Ute, Taino, Pueblo, Hopi, San Carlos Apache, and other Indigenous Nations who shared traditional knowledge and seeds, affirming their commitment to the health and wellbeing of future generations. 
 Among the focus of presentations and discussion were ongoing concerns in the Shiprock community about the long term impacts of the massive toxic mining waste spill that reached Shiprock’s primary water source, the San Juan River, almost exactly a year before. The discussion focused on the current and continuing threats to Indigenous Peoples’ lands, waters, inter-generational health, and ways of life by extractive industries, including thousands of other abandoned toxic mining waste sites located on waterways throughout the United States and beyond. 
 The following Declaration was adopted by consensus of the participants on August 13, affirming the rights of Indigenous Peoples to preserve their lands for food sovereignty by keeping them free from genetically modified seeds and plants and all forms of chemical contamination and toxic pesticides “so that our natural world is protected, nurtured and shared.” Presented by the Shiprock chapter’s president, Duane Chili Yazzie, the declaration was also endorsed and adopted by consensus at the 42nd Anniversary Conference of the Treaty Council in Waimanalo, Hawai’i by Indigenous Peoples from 38 Nations around the world on September 11. It will be a basis of work for the survival and well being of Indigenous Peoples worldwide. 
 — Andrea Carmen (Yaqui) is executive director of the International Indian Treaty Council. 
 IITC thanks Navajo Nation Shiprock Chapter President, Duane Chili Yazzie, and members of the Shiprock Chapter, the AgroEcology Fund, the Christensen Fund, and the Marisla Foundation for their generous contributions to this important gathering 
 DECLARATION OF THE INDIGENOUS FOOD SOVEREIGNTY 
 AND TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE FOR CLIMATE CHANGE RESILIENCY GATHERING 
 we are given the divine gift of nitsáhákees-thinking 
 we are made to be holy surface peoples of the Earth 
 our souls are one with the souls of living beings of all time 
 we were placed here with the four sacred plants to guide us 
 our original instructions teach us that corn is a root of our lifeways 
 our songs and prayers resonant with the heartbeat of our Earth Mother 
 with the south we are given the teachings to make our life plan 
 we are given reasoning to set our path of life with nahat’á-planning 
 in our early times we were happy living the Original Intent of the Creator 
 with the great intrusion of the invader our world became a life of hardship 
 our original instructions gave us resilience to make our way through difficult times 
 we are told we don’t own the land, but we belong to the Earth and she belongs to us 
 no earthly power or law has the authority to deny us our relationship with our Earth Mother 
 by the west we journey with the sacredness of living 
 we have been given the precious opportunity for iiná-living 
 we have profound and troubling concern for the state of the world 
 where powers of government and business compete to destroy the Earth 
 where we continue to suffer the consequences of the Doctrine of Discovery 
 where our life struggle is to rise above the conditions of colonization and dependency 
 where we must decolonize our policies and practices of food, water and land to live to survive 
 from the north we seek wisdom through our reflections 
 in humbleness we pray for blessings of unyielding sihasin-hope 
 our struggle to live is one of resistance, resilience and determination 
 in our wisdom we know we have the roots, songs and courage to survive 
 our strength and power is in our Indigenous identity, history, culture and politic 
 in healing from our intergenerational, historic unresolved trauma we also heal the Earth 
 we accept our life responsibility to remain Warriors uncompromising, to defend the sacred 
 we touch our sweet Earth Mother as we honor her life 
 we thank her for her life and beg her to have courage for our life 
 we feel and live her pain, we stand against unrelenting exploitation of her 
 we demand our Tribal Nations that our home lands be GMO and pesticides free 
 we stand strong to fight climate change and rally the cry of “Leave it in the Ground” 
 as Defenders of the Earth we stand together for Indigenous unity to defend our ground 
 it is of utmost urgency to protect the life of the Earth Mother as it is the future of the children 
 we pray the heavens to bless us with impeccable principles 
 as we walk strong to live our chosen lifeways the Creator set for us 
 as children of the Great Creator and the Earth Mother we demand justice 
 for our human rights to life, food, water, culture, health and clean environment 
 we challenge our Tribal leaders to protect our sacred medicines and our natural foods 
 it is an absolute that to be sovereign and self-determined, we must have food sovereignty 
 we call out our Tribal leaders and Warriors to defend our Indigenous lifeways, our Earth, our life 
 the Shiprock Chapter and International Indian Treaty Council were honored to host the Gathering to 
 provide this opportunity where relatives from the SW Diné Nation and other Indigenous Nations 
 could come together to share our traditional food knowledge and our leadership thoughts 
 about how we can work to restore and protect our traditional knowledge and lifeways 
 to preserve our seeds, foods and to defend our lands and waters that sustain all life 
 to grow our grandchildren to be strong in the future to face myriad challenges 
 our life work is to assure their wellness in spirit, culture and physical health 
 we commit to one another to continue learning and sharing in these ways 
 we commit to pass this knowledge on to our children for their survival 
 as our prophesies teach that future times will not be kind to all life 
 we were blessed with our traditional ways of planting, gathering, and caring for our animals 
 blessings which were passed to us through our songs, stories, prayers and ceremonies 
 these lifeways contain answers that are to help the world address climate change 
 to restore healthy foods and help institute green sustainable energy production 
 we fight land theft, deforestation and other threats to our food sovereignty 
 we are committed to protect and defend our remaining Indigenous lands 
 to educate and preserve our lands for Indigenous Food Sovereignty 
 our lands must be free from genetically modified seeds and plants 
 and all forms of chemical contamination and toxic pesticides 
 so that our natural world is protected, nurtured and shared 
 we proclaim our Indigenous human rights and our right to self-determination as sovereign free Peoples 
 we affirm our inherent rights recognized in the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
 we honor the life sacrifices of our ancestors as we carry on the sacred responsibilities 
 to our Peoples, our future generations and to our sweet sacred Earth Mother, 
 we thank the land, water, our relations with the plant and animal worlds 
 who give their beings and souls to give us all we need for our lives 
 we affirm our commitment to the Creator and to one another 
 to protect our Earth Mother, so that life can continue 
 it is urgent that we rise and sing the drum 
 the life of our Earth Mother is our life 
 adopted on 13 August 2016 
 Shiprock, SW Diné Nation 
 “Indigenous peoples have the right 
 to maintain and strengthen their distinctive 
 spiritual relationship with their traditionally owned or 
 otherwise occupied and used lands, territories, waters and coastal seas and 
 other resources and to uphold their responsibilities to future generations in this regard.” 
 -- Article 25, United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
 Rallies have swept the streets of Buenos Aires, Hamburg and Paris to denounce the corporate agrochemical giants Monsanto, Bayer and Syngenta. 
 Several hundred people marched on May 19 in France against GMOs, demanding a more ecological approach to agriculture, without pesticides. 
 About 2,000 people took to the streets against the chemical companies Monsanto, Bayer and BASF in Basel, Switzerland, where Syngenta, one of the world's largest pesticide producers, has its headquarters. 
 The participants protested against genetically modified seeds and monopolies in the agricultural sector. They criticized the use of toxic pesticides in southern countries, the expansion of genetic engineering and the practice of seed patents. 
 In late 2017, Bayer stated that it was expecting to close a deal to buy the US biotechnological company Monsanto in early 2018 and is continuing to work closely with authorities to be granted all the necessary permissions. 
 In 2016, shareholders of the US agricultural corporation Monsanto approved a proposed $66 million merger with a subsidiary of the German-based chemical company Bayer. 
 A Project of the Earth First! Journal: Celebrating 30 Years of News in Defense of Planet Earth. 
 Earlier this year, the Quechua People in the Peruvian state of Cusco, launched an ambitious plan to send 1,500 varieties of Potato to the Svalbard Global Seed Vault in the Arctic Circle. It was first time Indigenous Peoples ever contributed to the underground vault, which already houses more than 90,000 seed samples from around the world. 
 Exactly one month after the donation was announced, on April 15 “Peruvian President Alan García signed a decree allowing the import and planting of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in the country,” explains Amberly Polidor in a news briefing for the Sacred Land Film Project (SLFP). 
 The official decree puts at risk the genetic diversity of the Peruvian Andes, including the tuberous crop we know as potato. 
 The fourth most important crop in the world, Potato was first domesticated in Peru about 10,000 years ago. And while western households may take them for granted, they are now inextricably tied to Quechua identity, much like corn to the Maya or Reindeer to the Saami, as the 13-minute documentary “The Potato Park / Parque de la Papa” shows. 
 “Cusco is the center of origin of the potato, with the highest diversity of potato varieties found anywhere in the world. As guardians of the potatoes, Andean communities have, within challenging political contexts that favor international commercial interests, fought to protect their biocultural heritage. These actions have been supported by local governments, such as the Cusco regional government, and have led to five regions producing decrees that prohibit the use of GMOs … All that has been accomplished over the last 10 years of actions against GMOs in order to protect Peru’s high-quality natural, non-GMO crops is now being threatened,” Alejandro Argumedo of ANDES said in an email message to SLFP. 
 Last week, opponents of the decree converged in Lima to protest. “Many opponents argue that the country hasn’t conducted enough research and development in the field, and they are asking for a 15-year moratorium on GMOs, to give Peru more time to build the research infrastructure needed to fully assess and make the best decisions on the use of GMO crops,” Polidor explains. 
 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here: Cookie Policy 
 Reclaim the Seeds first began in 2010 in response to proposed adjustments to seed-related legislation by the European Union. Since then, this event has occurred once every year in different locations throughout the Netherlands. These legislative adjustments pose as threats for farmers, small-scale breeders of seeds, and biodiversity in general. Raising awareness concerning these and other developments that pose serious threats for a sustainable and socially just agricultural system has always been a primary goal. Simultaneously emphasis is put on possible alternatives to the current situation. Due to recent agricultural developments, Reclaim the Seeds now focuses on property rights and patents on seeds and crops. As new biotechnologies are released every year, industries continue to gain power over agriculture all over the world. For such few people to have so much control of the global food system is a risk not only to producers, but consumers as well. There needs to be a diversified, and locally based food system with genetic material that is available to anybody who needs access to it. 
 For most participants of Reclaim the Seeds, the idea of owning a crop does not make a lot of sense. Crops are living creations that propagate and adjust to their environments. Farmers have taken care of breeding crops for thousands of years. Plants are part of nature; they are here for everyone and owned by none. Nevertheless, large seed multinationals regard new varieties and properties of crops as their own invention. Besides wanting to claim the sole right to 'their inventions', large seed companies want to prevent other farmers to continue breeding and developing 'their' crops. The result is an increased concentration of power for large companies through patenting and so-called gene pools. In the Netherlands, small and middle-sized seed companies are against those patenting policies. 
 An increasing number of crop patents have been granted in the last few years. Luckily, these developments are not irreversible. As a reaction to the widespread protests against the ability to patent plants and seeds, the European Commission openly announced their interpretation of the current BioTech Guideline 98/44/EC, in which they distance themselves from the current situation where it is possible to patent crops in conventional agriculture. 
 The Current Situation On the 25th of March 2016 the European Patent Office (EPO) announced the following decision; "although no conventional cultivation processes can be patented, plants and animals that are generated through these processes can indeed be patented." Since this decision has been ratified, over 180 patents have been granted to conventionally produced crops and seeds. Examples are broccoli patented by Monsanto and insect repellent paprika and chili plants by Syngenta. Still over a 1000 other patents are pending for grants of patents. 
 Nevertheless, a prohibition has been included in the European Patent law on patenting plants and animals. Therefore, there is a lot of critique and protest against the current interpretation of the European law on patents. In a response to this resistance the European Commission published a notice in November 2016 in which distance is taken from the way in which the EPO interprets the patent laws. 
 To make a significant changes the nations of the European Union should clearly oppose themselves against the possibility of patenting plants and animals. In order to do so, one should make sure that the representatives of these nations say NO to patens on plants and animals during the assembly of the Administrative Council of the EPO this March. Derk-Jan de Groot and Paul van Beukering from the Ministry of Economic Affairs will represent the Netherlands during this meeting. Reclaim the Seeds at the 4th of March is a good moment to give them a clear message. 
 More background information, including information on individual patent requests, can be found on the website of No Patents On Seeds. 
 The website from Bionext contains information about the effects of patents on crops and on their campaign called De Grootste Zadenbank van Nederland (the largest seed bank of the Netherlands). The goals of the campaign is to influence the politics and the EPO the coming months. 
 The demand for sustainable agricultural products is increasing. Therefore, multinational corporations are in a rush to protect their markets by lobbying for legislation which promotes industrial agriculture above alternative, more sustainable methods. Sustainable seeds (as defined by us) are the seeds of peasants; constantly evolving, genetically diverse, freely accessible, requiring low-inputs, low costs, healthy and traditional. These tiny sources of life are history lessons for they are the result of centuries of traditional plant breeding and selection by a multitude of unique communities and societies. Their diversity is the key for a future of sustainable agriculture that is both preventative and resistant to climate change. Already, too much bio-cultural heritage has been lost thanks to the genetic bottleneck which has occurred thanks to conventional agriculture. 
 The fight to protect biodiversity and seed sovereignty is never ending. One such fight, for example, was the DUS seed criteria proposed to the European Union. This proposed rule called for all commercial crops introduced in the market have to meet a set of criteria called DUS, which is an abbreviation for distinctiveness, uniformity, and stability. This regulation excluded many regional crops which are adjusted to local conditions, and thus require less input to grow. The legislative proposal to the European commission, which was heavily influenced by the intense lobby of the commercial seed industry, would have resulted in a decrease of seed diversity and an increased market share for the big seed monopolies. Reclaim the Seeds has always opposed and resisted these plans. 
 Justly, this bill has been rejected by the European parliament in March 2014. It is very unlikely that this controversial seed law will get a second chance. The European Commission now has to formulate a new seed legislation; an arduous process which can take many years. It seems like the pressure of societal organisations and other democratic processes has succeeded to temporarily restrain the influence of powerful seed lobbyists. However, we remain wary. 
 Since the seed law proposal was rejected, the current European guidelines will remain in place for the time being. Although these guidelines mainly relate to a number of commercial crops, they nevertheless influence and restrict the work of seed saving organisations. All the same, some countries within the European Union have adjusted their national seed legislation, and occasionally favour seed saving entities and individuals. 
 Sources for more information and recent updates on the European seed legislation include; 
 The website of Campaign for Seed Sovereignty with mainly topical information in the newsletter in GermanDe website van de met vooral actuele informatie in de Duitstalige nieuwsbrief. 
 The website of ASEED provides more information on the campaigns against seed legislation and other topics related to agrarian biodiversity: https://aseed.net/topic/zaden-3. 
 Market concentration and monopoly's in agriculture 
 The influence of large companies on the production of food worldwide is rapidly increasing. The global trade in seeds clearly demonstrates this; a decreasing number of large multinational corporations hold a monopoly on the market. While new European regulations are being formulated for agricultural crops, large companies are silently taking over the European market. 
 Recently, two comprehensive and shocking reports about the concentration of power have been published. One of those includes; 'Putting the Cartel before the Horse...and Farm, Seeds, Soil and Peasants etc: Who Will Control the Agricultural Inputs?' directed by ETC Group. The report describes how six large multinational corporations control 75% of all private processing of agricultural crops, 60% of the commercial seed market and 76% of the sales of agricultural pesticides worldwide. Meanwhile, with the acquisition of Syngenta by ChinaChem, Monsato by Bayer and the merging of Dow and Dupont this concentration of power has increased substantially. However, it is worthwhile to pose the question how much impact the acquisition of Monsanto by Bayer would actually have on the current state of affairs. The following article by ASEED elaborates on this issue: Bayer buys Monsanto, but which difference does it make?? 
 In februari 2014 the green parties of the European Union published a report with comprehensive statistics about the European seed market. This report can be accessed through the following link: 'Concentration of market power in the EU seed market'. The research refuted the myth of the European seed market being very diverse which is often repeated by the European Seed Association (ESA) and the European Commission. 
 A brochure published by ASEED 'You Reap what You Sow - Monopolizing the seed industry' summarises the current state of affairs in the Netherlands and Europe and elaborates on which effects the current developments of the seed industry have on the agricultural sector. The brochure is available in Dutch and in English. 
 We from Reclaim the Seeds share the opinion that genetic manipulation with the use of modern biotechnology is not right. Redically changing genes of a crop without exactly knowing what the effects may carries substantial risks for the environment. Another risk is that these modified crops cross pollinate with other crops which results in unwarranted spread of the modified genetic material. This process, which inherently modifies the gene selection of the 'untouched' crop, is irreversible. 
 Meanwhile, large seed companies, their lobbyists, and many scientists continue to point out the benefits of genetic modification. One of the main arguments is that genetically modified crops can help solve world hunger. However, genetic modification solely assures higher profits which seems to be the main goal of the industry. 
 The argument that GM crops are a solution to hunger in the world is false due to the fact that hunger is mainly a socio-economic problem. The amount of food that is produced is not insufficient; it is the wealth and the access to healthy food that are unequally divided. Additionally, a lot of food is wasted in the post-harvest phase and during processing. Furthermore, agricultural lands and food crops are being used to raise cattle and for dairy production instead of providing healthy food for people that suffer malnutrition and food insecurity. One of the solutions to these problems is to make sure that communities and regions are enabled to organise diverse and independent food system. The money that is now used for the development and introduction of genetically modified crops could be invested in the improvement of small scale agro-ecological alternatives. This is an example of a real solution to solve malnutrition and poverty throughout world. However, this is not as attractive for multinational corporations since profitability is not the ultimate goal of these alternatives. 
 When introducing a GM crop, the safety in consuming the particular crop should not be the sole concern; all social economic effects should be taken into account. In reality, it is the large seed companies that want to introduce patented crops to the market. This occurs at the expense of the farmers, small seed companies, and breeders. Additionally, agricultural biodiversity decreases which renders crops more vulnerable to plagues and pests. Genetic modification is part of an agricultural system that adjusts the environment for the sake of the crop using synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, and intense machinery. A sustainable agricultural system, on the other hand, supports diversity because the conditions are not so intensely adjusted to suit the crop. Instead, a breeder will select for a crop variety that is adjusted to each local environment. Thus, needing less toxic inputs. In order to feed the ever growing population, we as a society must support sustainable agricultural practices and protect ourselves as well as our natural resources. 
 also Greenpeace provides information about the negatives effects of GMOs and the organisation counters the criticism from GMO-lobbyist that stopping GMOs would be bad for people suffering malnutrition. See for example the article Voedselzekerheid kan niet wachten op de 'Gouden bergen' van gentech. 
 For which problems are GMOs the solution? This question as well the starting point for the production of the documentary 'Gen zoekt boer. Maar is de liefde wederzijds?' in 2008. The reader that goes together with the documentary shows the risks related to GMOs and the related to this in the Netherlands. 
 We are not against progress, but we do want that the situation of people is improving. 
 DIY food production: - Seed saving - Seed swaps - Balcony, rooftop garden, allotment garden, community garden 
 Relation consumer - producer: - Community supported agriculture - Other types of direct trade - Fairtrade 
 Producer - Organic - Crop rotation, intercropping, small scale production - Healty soils - Using open pollinated seeds - Agroforestry, food forests and permaculture 
 The concept of food sovereignty is often used as an overarching term for the numerous and diverse initiatives that aim to build a sustainable and social agricultural system. It is key that we as citizens are able to decide how we produce our food and what we consume. We from Reclaim the Seeds want short food chains and a real relation between the producer and consumer. If consumers would see how, where and by who their food is produced, the connection to their food is strengthened and hereby more effort would be taken to protect it. At the same time, it is motivating for producers to see where and how their products end up. 
 The struggle for food sovereignty is in itself a battle against the large agro-corporations and supermarkets. Their goals of offering the lowest price and getting the highest returns is the root of many agricultural, ecological, and societal problems. Large multinationals aim to have a few crops produced everywhere, which results in millions of acres of monocultures. Agrarian biodiversity does not at all thrive under these circumstances and the farmers become dispensable suppliers. In this problematic situation the seed industry plays a primary role. 
 Food is an increasingly important topic. More and more people want to know where their food comes from and how it is produced. Small scale initiatives to produce ones' own food or organise decentralised distribution systems are getting ever more popular. Clearly, it is time for food sovereignty, also in The Netherlands and Belgium! The brochure 'It is time for food sovereignty by ASEED, published in 2012 explores this topic and informs on how to work towards food sovereignty. 
 On an international level there is an expanding network working on food sovereignty and envisioning a different agricultural system. In November 2016 there was an important gathering in Romania where a large part of the Dutch delegation of this movement was present. Reports on the gathering, called Nyéléni, can be found on https://nyelenieurope.net/. 
 Join the National Farmers Union and strengthen our campaign for Canada to adopt a truly farmer-friendly seed law that balances the interests of the public, farmers and plant breeders in a manner accepted by the Canadian public. 
 AAFC is holding its Atlantic region Seed Royalty Consultation meeting in Charlottetown on Friday January 18 at the Delta Hotels Prince Edward, (18 Queen Street – see map) 
 The corporate seed industry has convinced the federal government to take the next step towards a system to make farmers pay seed companies for seed every year even when we use farm-saved seed. They are proposing to change regulations under the UPOV ’91 Plant Breeders Rights Act, and are considering two approaches – End Point Royalties or Trailing Contracts that would apply to new varieties registered after February 2015. 
 The End Point Royalty approach would require farmers to pay a royalty on their harvested crop (a per bushel royalty) if they grow a newer variety. The Trailing Contract approach would require farmers to ask the seed company for permission to plant seed saved from a previous crop of a newer variety and make farmers pay them a royalty when using farm saved seed. The seed industry likes the Trailing Contract option best because it would bring in more money and would involve setting up a comprehensive data collection system to track farm saved seed users. 
 The seed industry expects to collect over $100 million of dollars every year from these compulsory payments. This money would go to seed companies such as Bayer, Syngenta, BASF and DowDupont. The system for charging a royalty on crops harvested from farm saved seed would be developed for wheat first, with the intent of applying it to other cereal crops, pulse crops, and other crop kinds later. 
 The NFU opposes the UPOV ’91 seed law, which Canada enacted in 2015, because it turns farmers’ age-old right to save and use farm saved seed into a privilege that can be taken away by regulation. 
 The NFU is opposed to End Point Royalties and Trailing Contracts. These are simply ways to increase the monopoly power of seed companies by forcing farmers to pay more for seed, restricting farmers’ right to save seed and making us pay them for seed we grow on our farms. 
 We call for keeping farmers’ right to save and use our own seed, and for public funding and farmer-controlled check-off funding to support plant breeding. The government must be stopped from bringing in a regulation to take away the “farmers’ privilege” under the Plant Breeders Rights Act. 
 The Charlottetown consultation is on Friday January 18, 2019 10:00 am to 4:00 pm at the Delta Hotels Prince Edward Island, 16 Queen Street. NOTE: It is not necessary to register – the important thing is to have as many farmers there as possible. Bring a friend or two! 
 What is UPOV? 
 The International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) is an intergovernmental organization that has created model laws that allow seed developers to claim property rights similar to patents. Canada joined UPOV and adopted its 1978 model law by passing the Plant Breeders’ Rights Act in 1990. The 1991 model law, known as UPOV ’91, enhances the rights of multinational seed companies such as Bayer, Syngenta, Dow-DuPont, Limagrain, Viterra, Pioneer, and Cargill, while restricting farmers’ rights. Canada formally adopted UPOV ’91 on June 19, 2015. 
 By adopting UPOV ’91 Canada has: 
 reduced the freedom and independence of Canadian farmers by making it much more difficult to save and reuse seed of new plant varieties, forcing them to pay more for seed; 
 opened the door to an end-point royalty system that would allow seed companies to collect royalties on the whole crop grown from new varieties – including each cut of hay on forage crops – if they cannot, or do not collect it on the seed. 
 transferred millions of dollars every year from farmers to plant breeders’ rights (PBR) holders 
 consolidated the power and control of world’s largest agribusiness corporations over seed, and thus over the Canadian farming and food system. 
 As well, as a result of Canada adopting UPOV ’91: 
 Farmers right to save, store or clean new varieties of seed for replanting has been converted to a privilege — which can be withdrawn by regulation. Read Bill C-18 and Farmers Privilege to learn more. 
 Companies are entitled to royalties for at least 20 years on each new variety for which they hold PBRs (up from the former 18 years under Canada’s UPOV ’78 regime.) 
 Seed cleaners that condition and treat seed, as well as mills and processors that buy crops grown from new varieties will require assurance that the farmer-seller has paid PBR royalties to avoid the risk of litigation by the PBR holder. 
 Demands under UPOV ’91 for royalty payments, along with potential future restrictions on farm-saved seed, will have long-term implications for Canadian agriculture that will change its structure and negatively affect farmers’ livelihoods. Some of the likely changes include: 
 higher per-acre cost of production due to higher seed prices; 
 lower margins because if end-use royalties are implemented, they will reduce potential gross income at sale; 
 fewer and larger farms because reduced profitability will drive larger scales of production; 
 loss of independent seed cleaning businesses as farmers shift toward buying seed directly from PBR holders or their licensees instead of cleaning a portion of their harvested crops for use as seed; 
 increased litigation within the value chain as PBR holders seek to maximize royalty revenues; 
 increased use of inputs such as fertilizers, herbicides and insecticides as farmers seek to maximize yields and reduce risks to cover the increased cost of seed; 
 negative effects on air, water, soil, biodiversity due to increased use of inputs; 
 loss of vibrant rural communities as economic activity decreases because wealth is transferred from local farmers to distant, often foreign, holders of PBRs. 
 Promote the adoption of a truly farmer-friendly seed law that balances the interests of the public, farmers and plant breeders in a manner accepted by the Canadian public, and allows Canada to meet its international obligations for intellectual property rights protection. 
 Restore Funding to Public Plant Breeding. Canada’s public plant breeders are internationally respected and have made immeasurable contributions to Canadian agriculture. For example, canola was developed by public plant breeders at the University of Manitoba in the 1970s. Laird, a lentil variety suitable for prairie production, was developed at the University of Saskatchewan’s Crop Development Centre (CDC). Nearly all of our wheat varieties have been developed by AAFC in collaboration with several Canadian universities. None of these varieties would have been part of Canadian agriculture without the government’s long-term support for public plant breeding. The rewards of this public investment are clear. 
 Federal budgets from 2012 to 2015 reduced funding for public plant breeding, and remaining dollars are being directed to public-private funding partnerships and commercialization initiatives. Public funds therefore are skewed toward supporting private commercial interests rather than public-interest research for public benefit. 
 Take Public Plant Breeding to Variety Level. The federal government stopped funding public plant breeding of important cereal crops beyond the development of germplasm, which must then be sold to private breeders to develop varieties for commercialization. The new varieties so developed are privately owned and subject to plant breeders’ rights. Farmers, whose check-off dollars support this research, will pay yet again through the increased royalties granted under UPOV ’91. This system of private interests benefitting twice – first by using public research funding and then by collecting royalties on seed and production – is unjust and against the public interest. 
 Protect farmers from expensive court litigation regarding plant variety and patent disputes. The NFU recommends that the government create a body similar to the Canadian Grain Commission that would settle disputes. Farmers would then be on a level playing field with multinational companies, and legal fees would not impede their defense. 
 So-called “trade deals” are being used to enforce plant breeders rights and prevent farmers from saving seed. See CETA and C-18 = Too Much Power for Seed Companies and Factsheet #6 for information about how CETA is connected with the attack on our right to save seeds. The Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations requires countries to sign on to UPOV ’91. 
 At the 2012 NFU Convention, then NFU President Terry Boehm gave a presentation called “UPOV ’91 Again” outlining the state of the attack on seed saving. 
 In 2005 the NFU worked with allies and citizens across Canada and we were able to stop changes to the Seed Act that were being proposed through the Seed Sector Review. 
 Together, we can retain control of Canada’s vital seed supply. 
 Recent developments 
 The corporate seed industry is pushing for even MORE power to control seed with its “Seed Synergy” campaign. 
 The corporate seed sector is carrying out a major project they call “Seed Synergy” which aims to influence the expected review of Canada’s Seed Act and Regulations. 
 The “Seed Synergy Collaborators” are the Boards and Executive Directors of 6 industry organizations that are dominated by the multinational seed companies: Canadian Seed Growers Association (CSGA); Canadian Seed Trade Association (CSTA); Canadian Seed Institute (CSI); Commercial Seed Analysts Association of Canada (CSAAC); Canadian Plant Technology Agency (CPTA) (CPTA has no website – it hires private investigators to find and sue farmers suspected of PBR and patent violations); and CropLife Canada. They are promoting an extreme make-over of Canada’s seed regulatory system that would eliminate public oversight and allow corporations to maximize their power and increase their wealth under Canada’s new UPOV ’91 Plant Breeders Rights regime. 
 The Seed Synergy “Green Paper” (draft) published in 2017 outlines their vision. On the surface, it tries to appear as if it is solving practical problems and promoting efficiency. In fact, it would put the multinational seed and agro-chemical corporations in charge. A careful reading of the Green Paper indicates that Seed Synergy is proposing to: 
 Fast-track new patented GMO crop approvals to help biotech companies increase their returns from seed royalties. 
 Replace our public the variety registration system and its quality control measures with a list of any and all varieties seed companies want to sell. 
 Empower private seed companies to oversee the seed certification processes and control all the data involved, paid for with tax dollars. 
 Replace independent third-party field inspection of seed crops with the seed companies inspecting fields of the farmers contracted to grow their seed varieties. 
 Water down certified seed standards to the lowest level customers will tolerate as a way to save money. 
 Reduce common seed use as much as possible by making it expensive, difficult, impossible and/or illegal for farmers to sell a crop grown from farm-saved seeds. 
 Make farmers pay End Point Royalties to seed companies on their harvested crops. Double seed companies’ royalty revenues by having the tax-payer match EPR payments by farmers. 
 Restrict the use of Farm Saved Seed by taking away farmers privilege, requiring company permission and payment of royalty to use harvested grain to seed the next year’s crop. 
 Create an industry-controlled database of all seed sales transactions to enforce Plant Breeders Rights royalty payment, make it easier to sue farmers suspected of infringement, and to identify popular royalty-free varieties for de-registration. 
 Make sure seed for any crop new to Canada is subject to Plant Breeders Rights. 
 Lobby for international acceptance of seed and crops contaminated with unapproved GMOs 
 Intensify Canada’s involvement in the international UPOV ’91 organization to enhance the power of seed companies to extract royalties and control access to seed. 
 Remove public funding from government regulatory agencies and authorize a consortium of multinational seed companies to set priorities Canada’s seed system. 
 Create a super-lobby group of agro-chemical biotech and seed companies to regulate seed in Canada. 
 Amended PBR Act restricts the rights of farmers and other Canadians to save, reuse, exchange, and sell seeds. 
 On Feburary 27, 2015, amendments to Canada’s Plant Breeders Rights Act came into force after Bill C-18 was passed by Parliament. Now, the UPOV ’91 Plant Breeders Rights regime applies to all new plant varieties if they were granted Plant Breeders Rights after that date. Varieties that were on the market before February 27, 2015 continue to be dealt with under the previous, UPOV ’78, rules. For a 2-page printable summary of the current situation, see UPOV Update, Feb. 2016. 
 For more information about how the current law affects your seed-saving rights, please see the NFU newsletter article, Seed saving under the amended Plant Breeders Rights Act. The Canadian Seed Trade Association provides a database of crop varieties registered in Canada and their Plant Breeders’ Rights status where you can find out whether the varieties you grow are under UPOV ’91, UPOV ’78 or in the public domain. 
 On December 9, 2013 Bill C-18, the “Agricultural Growth Act” was introduced into Parliament. It was an omnibus bill that, among other measures, amended the Plant Breeders Rights Act to conform with UPOV ’91. The NFU opposed this bill. Our actions included a citizens campaign called Stop Bill C-18 as well as engagement with the legislative process. NFU Seed and Trade Committee chair, Terry Boehm presented our arguments against Bill C-18 before the House of Commons Agriculture Committee on October 9, 2014. The official transcript of his presentation is posted here. 
 The NFU also submitted a brief. Later, the NFU presented before the Senate Agriculture and Forestry Committee on February 3, 2014 (read the official transcript and brief). 
 Bill C-18 was supported by public relations campaign orchestrated by Partners in Innovation, an “Astroturf” (fake grassroots) group that claimed to represent farmers, but was actually a mouthpiece for the corporate seed industry. The NFU exposed the Partners in Innovation campaign and discredited its claims. 
 Although Bill C-18 was passed, the NFU was instrumental in getting a very important amendment passed. The original Bill would have given exclusive rights to stock (store) seed to the PBR-holder, rendering the farmers’ privilege to reproduce and condition seed meaningless. The amendment added the stocking of seed to the farmers’ privilege provisions, which provides more space for farmers to exercise their traditional seed-saving practices than would have otherwise occurred. 
 Restrictions on farmers’ seed saving, and the massive transfer of wealth from farmers to seed companies that will follow, are not necessary for the development of useful new varieties. It is a shame that Canada\’s government has decided to pass a law that will enrich some of the wealthiest and most powerful global corporations at the expense of Canadian farmers and the biodiversity of Canada’s food system.” 
 Stay in the loop with issues affecting farmers in Canada.Get the latest from the NFU delivered to your in-box! 
 National Farmers UnionUnion Nationale des Fermiers2717 Wentz AveSaskatoon, SKS7K 4B6(306) 652-9465(306) 664-6226nfu@nfu.ca 
 The National Farmers Union / L'Union Nationale des Fermiers is unique among farm organizations: we advocate for people’s interests against corporate control of our food system. 
 If you would like to participate in the NFU’s work, you can become a Family Farm Member or a non-farming Associate Member. 
 INational Counsel of Technological and Scientific Development Productivity Fellow - level 1C. Bachelor's degree in Social Communication from the Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro (1987), Master's in Information Science from the Instituto Brasileiro de Informação em Ciência e Tecnologia (1998) and PhD in Biosciences Management, Education and Dissemination from the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (2001). Works at the Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, part of the Studies on Science Communication at the Museu da Vida (Museum of Life). Supervises Masters and Ph.D. students on the postgraduate course in Biosciences and Health Education at the Instituto Oswaldo Cruz/Fiocruz, History of Science and Health at the Casa de Oswaldo Cruz/Fiocruz and at the Instituto de Bioquímica Médica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. Coordinates SciDev.Net (Science and Development Network) for Latin America and the Caribbean (www.scidev.net), site based in London and set up with the support of the journals Nature and Science. Leader of the CNPq Science, Communication and Society Research Group. Email: luisa.massarani3@gmail.comIIMaster in Science, Technology and Society from the Universidad de Oviedo (Spain); Master in Communication and Culture of S&T from the Universidad de Salamanca (Spain); and Masters in STS from the Universidad Nacional de Quilmes (Argentina); PhD program at the Universidad de Oviedo (Spain). Senior Researcher at the Centro REDES (Buenos Aires, Argentina). Email: cpolino@ricyt.edu.arIIIPh.D. in Science and Culture, Universidad Autónoma Madrid, Master's in Science, Technology and Society, Universidad de Salamanca. Researcher at the Centro REDES (Buenos Aires, Argentina). Lecturer and researcher at the Universidad Nacional de Entre Ríos (Argentina). Email: ccortassa@centroredes.org.arIVDoctoral candidate at the Universidad de Oviedo (Spain). Researcher in public perceptions of science and scientific culture issues. Email: meugenia.fazio@gmail.comVMA in Media Ecology; New York University; PhD in Hispanic Studies, University of California, Riverside. Senior researcher at the Centro de Estudios de Historia de la Ciencia José Babini, Universidad Nacional de San Martín. She does research on science communication, technical and environmental controversies, and the impact of globalization on science and technology. Email: amvara@unsam.edu.ar 
 ABSTRACT 
 Over the last fifteen years, Argentina has become one of the world's biggest producers and exporters of genetically modified (GM) crops. Different social stakeholders have debated issues related to GM crops such as, among others, the environmental risks, economic advantages and disadvantages, and increased inequality between large and small farmers. However, small farmers have largely remained absent from the discussion. This article presents the results of a study using focus groups on Argentinian small farmers' perceptions and attitudes towards GM crops. The results suggest that local farmers are satisfied with the new technology but also have fears concerning the environmental and social impacts of genetically modified crops and organisms. 
 Key words: Genetically modified crops; Farmers; Public perception; Argentina 
 Introduction 
 In the context of the discussion of the "new sociology of science" (FRICKEL and MOORE, 2006) and the "commercialization of science", which has belatedly been included in science and technology social studies (STS), Mirowsky and Sent's (2008) description stands out as regards the changes that have taken place when they describe a "regime of globalised privatization", characterized by the privatization of publicly-funded research, transnational trade agreements that add to national controls, the accumulation of human capital by "whoever has the money to pay" and a focus on biomedicine, genetics in informatics and the economy (2008, p. 641 and 655-662). 
 As regards biotechnology specifically, Heller (2001) highlights the formation of a bio-economy, positing that this represents a new means of production that emerged when capital reached the limits of industrial production and entered what could be called an organic phase: a phase in which capital targets the reproductive facets of cultural and biological life as areas for intensifying production and commoditization. In the same vein, Jasanoff (2006) includes new biotechnology and control over seeds in his discussion of imperialism, deeming neo-liberalism a new version of imperialism and biotechnology as a technical-political-social construct that fits this scenario well: 
 the capacity to engineer the genetic characteristics of plants has blended seamlessly with state and corporate projects of managing human populations so as to legitimate the exercise of power. Both nation-states and, in an era of neo-liberalism, the multinational corporations that states are in league with have displayed their readiness to deploy agricultural biotechnology in advancing their interests on a global scale (JASANOFF, 2006, p. 292). 
 In this context, some stakeholders are favorably positioned as they are the ones that promote the technologies and are able to influence policy when regulatory frameworks are being negotiated: in particular, transnational corporations. Large-scale producers are also favorably placed among local stakeholders as they are able to incorporate the technologies and pay the respective fees, thus becoming the target consumer for the technologies. On the other hand, small farmers are among those stakeholders who find themselves excluded twice over: from decisions on whether to introduce the technologies (or not) and from the possibility of benefiting from them. 
 The processes that have led to the privatization of knowledge and the commercialization of science have, moreover, led to heightened critical discourse on the marriage of science, industry and business and, simultaneously, to a more vigilant form of social awareness, whether receptive or in opposition to, as regards the evaluation and management of the risks stemming from technological development. Scientific studies (and this includes those with a more communicative focus) have amassed a wealth of work on how specialized systems, technological developments, industries and governments interact with the mobilization of civil society on experimental or medical and environmental developments (DUNWOODY and GRIFFIN, 2007; CARVALHO, 2007). 
 Biotechnology has been emblematic in this regard: there have been many and varied studies on social perceptions that document (both in central and peripheral countries) a gradually clearer awareness of the impact of scientific-technological development and the existence of complex attitudes which are contradictory in many regards, which stress the risks as a key dimension in the relationship between science, technological innovation, specialized systems and public policy (DURANT and BAUER, 1998; GASKELL and BAUER, 1999; PRIEST, 2000, 2001; MASSARANI and MOREIRA, 2005). This has shaped debates about science and risk assessment, introducing the notion of the precautionary principlei as one of the characteristics when drawing up legislation regulating contemporary public policy (STIRLING, 2007). The issue of environmental and social risk emerges among agricultural producers as part of the broader discussion concerning the impacts of technology on the restructuring of society and the economy. 
 Genetically modified (GM) crops were introduced in Argentina in the mid-1980s and they were quickly taken up by local farmers. The spread of biotechnology brought about a major change in the country's agricultural production context, spearheading the movement towards a new technology-based paradigm that was supported to a great extent by the corporations involved in developing and marketing GM products and by the National Institute for Agricultural Technology (INTA) (VARA, 2004). 
 At the time, the impact of biotechnology on developing countries' agricultural productivity, national and international biosafety standards and the potential risks to the environment were the leitmotivs of the fledging debate on GM crops (ALTIERI and ROSSET, 1999; McGLOUGHLIN, 1999; ATKINSON et al., 2001). According to Brooks (2005), the prevalent discourse tended to flag up a series of moral arguments - the same ones as the Green Revolution from 1965 to 1980 - on the potential contribution agro-biotechnology could make to reducing hunger and poverty in developing countries. At the same time, critical discourse stressed, among other concerns, the shortcomings of regulatory frameworks, the potential for these technological innovations to disrupt traditional or indigenous agricultural practices (STONE, 2004) or the increasing threat of social exclusion and inequality for certain groups of farmers (HALL and LANGFORD, 2008). 
 However, unlike other countries and contexts where some studies are already available on farmers' perceptions of and attitudes towards GM crops, for instance in the United States and Brazil (e.g., c.f. CHIMMIRI et al., 2006; HALL and LANGFORD, 2008; GUEHLSTORF, 2008; ALMEIDA and MASSARANI, 2011), there is a dearth of empirical information on this issue in Argentina. With the exception of some works (SAGPYA, 2003), the majority of local studies related to the issue of GM crops ignore farmers as key players. Farmers have both played an active role in introducing this new technology and have had to interact with it during their daily activities. The objective of this research was to address this paucity of information by examining in depth the different experiences, perceptions and attitudes towards agricultural biotechnology of small farmers in Argentina. This article is part of a project that is supported by the International Development Research Centre, Canada, and by Capes (the Brazilian agency Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior, linked to the Ministry of Education). 
 The local context 
 With 22.9 million hectares of GM crops planted in 2010, Argentina ranks third in the world: with the United States in pole position (66.8), followed by Brazil (25.4). The lion's share of GM crops in Argentina is made up of soy (19.1 million hectares), followed by cotton (95% of all cotton grown is transgenic) and maize (87%) (JAMES, 2011). Recent figures released by the National Statistics and Census Institute reveal that the "soy complex" - soybeans in granular form, meal for animal feed and soybean oil - currently represents a quarter of the country's overall exportsii. 
 Immediately after its introduction a decade and a half ago, transgenic soy became a symbol for agro-biotechnology applications in Argentina. The success in the uptake of the Roundup Ready (RR) varieties, which Monsanto created to be resistant to the herbicide glyphosate, and their combination with no-till methods "marked a decisive point from which this crop began a period of extremely rapid growth" (BEGENSIC, 2002, p. 3). Thereby, soy replaced other crops and was introduced with good results in areas previously deemed unimportant from an agro-ecological viewpoint. The widespread use of RR soy amongst local farmers was chiefly attributed to the fact that it makes daily work easier and yields are lower. Another key factor was that Monsanto failed to patent RR soy in Argentina, which enabled other transnational corporations (like Nidera) and local companies (such as Don Mario, Relmó and La Tijereta) to include this strain among their varieties that were adapted to different areas of the country. Consequently, the price of RR soy remains substantially lower than in the United States (GAO, 2000). In this context, allied to the fact that the patent for glyphosate expired in the mid-1990s, the technological package ended up being a low-cost one for Argentinean producers (e.g. PENNA and LEMA, 2003; TRIGO and CAP, 2003; QAIM and TRAXLER, 2005). 
 Although GM crop production has rapidly increased over the last decade, GM crops have not been without technical, political and economic controversy, involving different specialists, organizations and regulatory and supervisory government authorities from the very outset. As has occurred with other biotechnology applications, in the case of genetically modified soy, its safety as regards health and the environment has been called into question. It has also been pointed out that the growth of soy monoculture has taken place at the expense of other crops and livestock rearing. Moreover, soy monoculture is said to encourage the concentration of land, expulsion of small farmers, dependence on technology developed by multinational corporations and the intensive use of costly machinery and equipment. Environmental organizations (Foro por la Tierra y la Alimentación and Red Alerta Transgénicos) have warned that the country could become a monoculture-dependent "soybean republic" (VARA, 2005). On this issue, Greenpeace - as well as social movements and NGOs such as the Grupo de Reflexión Rural Movimiento de Campesinos de Santiago del Estero, among others, - have repeatedly stated that soy destroys the environment and that its use as a crop can be seen as a paradigm of the country's agricultural insecurity. 
 Moreover, the possible negative impact of glyphosate on rural workers' health is currently an increasingly important controversy involving scientists, legislators, companies and government representatives (VARA, PIAZ and ARANCIBIA, 2012; ARANCIBIA, forthcoming). 
 Against this backdrop of declared or latent conflicts, the mass media in Argentina has also covered stories on GM soy. As Polino and Fazio (2005) demonstrated, terms like "biotechnology" and "transgenic" appeared in journalistic discourse at the end of the 1990s and have spread swiftly and continuously. Yet in the same article, the authors reveal the results of a piece of national research where the majority of Argentineans (60%) living in urban areas were not aware of GM soy production in the country. This would suggest that almost a decade after this technology was introduced in Argentina, genetically modified crops were off the radar for a sizeable segment of society. 
 As regards the possible effects of GM soy on health and the environment, the research revealed that there was no prevailing perception. Personal stances were shared evenly between four alternatives: those who believed that GM soy was not harmful; people who were sure the opposite was true (at least in terms of the potential); ambivalent people; and those with no opinion. Nevertheless, when asked if they would buy a genetically modified product, the majority of people answered no, saying they would prefer not to buy any transgenic products, even if they were cheaper (POLINO and FAZIO, 2005). This conclusion tallies with the findings of Mucci (2004) and with the moderately negative pre-disposition amongst consumers revealed in research by SAGYPA (2003). 
 Participants and procedures 
 This study is part of a larger project researching the social dimensions and public policy-related aspects arising from the uptake of GM crops in Brazil and Argentina. 
 A qualitative focus-group methodology was used to research small farmers' perceptions of genetically modified crops, which enables information to be collected through members of a group interacting on a given topic (KITZINGER, 1994, 1995; MORGAN, 1997). As such, the advantage it offers is that it is a partially-controlled observation situation that closely resembles a normal conversational exchange, which enables discussions to be enriched with the introduction of aspects that researchers have not foreseen. 
 Five focal groups were held, with a total of thirty-eight participants, between June and July 2007. The groups varied from five to thirteen (Av = 7.6) subjects, who had been selected by being put forward by producer associations, and included farmers with up to one hundred hectares productive land from three Argentinean provinces: Buenos Aires (cities of Pereyra, Bragado and Junín), Chaco (Villa Ángela) and Entre Ríos (Gualeguay). The criterion of intragroup homogeneity and intergroup heterogeneity was followed in forming the groups with regard to the prevalent type of GM crop among the participants. Intergroup heterogeneity was also planned for when the productive areas to be examined were chosen. In this way the groups were set up in such a manner as to represent the diversity of economic and social characteristics of the agricultural regions of Argentinaiii and producers' experiences with different applications of GM products (Table 1). 
 Meetings were held in rooms located in the participants' communities and the sessions lasted one and a half hours on average. 
 The discussion followed the standard for qualitative procedures, with moderators presenting the main topics and common questions to the groups, steering the conversations in a non-directional manner and avoiding expressing their own points of view. 
 The dialogues entailed a series of questions on different levels, from those related to biotechnology and genetics in general - which acted as an anchor for farmers' perceptions in particular with regard to GM crops - to others more strictly related to farmers' experience of, information about and attitudes towards their specific crops and the previously-described context. The audio recordings of each session were transcribed in full. The results reported below cover the most significant examples of interventions on: a) knowledge and consumption of genetically modified food; b) the perceived benefits linked to GM crops; c) perception of risks from GM technologies, in particular regarding health and the environment; d) the perception of stakeholders who have benefitted from GM crops; e) the participation of farmers in the decision-making process. 
 Results 
 Knowledge of GM crops and attitudes regarding consumption 
 Significant differences regarding the level of knowledge and the sources of information were noted between groups that use and those who do not use GM crops. Farmers who use GM crops found it easier to remember the time they first heard about them: they mentioned a time frame between 1994 and 1997, encompassing the period in which the authorities allowed genetically modified soy to be grown commercially, which was used for the first time in Argentina for the 1997 harvest. The majority of subjects stated they had first had contact through sales representatives from biotechnology companies. The majority of participants from Bragado, Junín and Gualeguay started growing GM soy as soon as it appeared on the market. For most of them, their first contact came through direct experience, i.e. by growing genetically modified seed as a test. For farmers growing crops other than soy (Villa Ángela), the mass media, word-of-mouth and the Agricultural Federation were the main sources of information on the matter. The majority could not pinpoint exactly when they first heard about GM crops and, when they did specify a date, the date was only a few years before the focal group met. 
 Producers of GM crops have knowledge about them, at least generally-speaking. Some of them provided a clear definition of GM crops, explaining in their own words the general characteristics and the type of resistance obtained and, in some cases, using basic scientific concepts. Others managed to at least mention "key words", such as "laboratory", "modification" or "gene". However, as the dialogue below shows, farmers with little experience of GM crops generally demonstrated that they were not familiar with the issue, and often were not able to provide a definition. They also confused "GM crops", "genetic improvement" and "hybrid plants", chiefly amongst those with a low level of schooling, who confused "GM crops" with "organic" crops: 
 "What are transgenic crops? We don't know..." (1-7) 
 "Transgenic, organic, isn't it all the same thing? I don't exactly know what they are..." (1-11) 
 GM crops were also closely identified with pesticides - a question that received special attention among participants in the Pereyra group, where training is available for those interested in planting crops without pesticides. Even among those most well-informed and familiar with the subject, some confusion may occur, as appears to be the case in the following definition: 
 "It is a plant modified by man to produce something that is not present in nature. It's a manipulation. It's a modification [...] They identified a soy plant that didn't die and isolated the gene from it. They mapped the ones that were resistant to glyphosate" (2-5). 
 An interesting comparison was raised in the Villa Ángela group, which defined GM crops as the result and a scientific intervention similar to that used to obtain a test tube baby (term used mainly for the preliminary stages of in vitro fertilization): 
 "I think it's like a test tube baby or something similar." (4-6) 
 "Exactly: they take the seed and carry out the experiment." (4-3) 
 "Did you all know that with test tube babies, you can even know what color the baby's eyes will be? I think you can know exactly what color, shape, everything will be ..." (4-6) 
 The association is interesting from a social consciousness point of view as regards how scientists intervene in nature. Although In Vitro fertilization and transgenics are not isomorphic, in both techniques man intervenes to obtain a result that is unavailable using natural processes. Both also raise bioethical issues. The notion of genetic manipulation is part of the debate surrounding In Vitro fertilization, which includes questions such as genetic manipulation to choose the gender of the embryo - and can go even further with therapeutic cloning. It is the concept of human intervention in a laboratory which is stressed in this comparison between transgenic products and test tube babies. The issue of genetic manipulation and the bioethical controversies linked to it were raised at different times in the groups while the consequences for health and the environment were being discussed. 
 The majority of participants stated they had already consumed GM products or would do so without any fears or preconceptions. More than this, a widespread perception is that these products are so widely available that people consume them without even knowing. 
 "We all eat them [genetically modified food]!" (2-5) 
 "Everyone eats genetically modified food. You too [referring to the moderator and the observer]." (2-4) 
 Benefits of GM crops 
 The uptake of transgenic seeds in Argentina unleashed a maelstrom of controversy regarding positive and negative issues linked to them, as mentioned before. In particular, the benefits related to their introduction were closely linked to the promise of huge profits stemming from transformative biotechnology. Among the groups, opinions were linked to each person's different experiences with GM crop applications, except with the Pereyra farmers, who had never had any contact with them and therefore based their stances on presumptions. In this group, the benefits were imagined to be possible solutions to problems and difficulties encountered on a daily basis, where the technology could act as a tool to help growers improve the quality of their products: 
 "Yes, [using GM seeds] might be a good idea if there is another plant that doesn't attract pests, it could be better for us... (...) because the plants are very delicate (...), very fragile... If there were a better plant, it would be cheaper and we could sell it on the market at a lower price." (1-6) 
 Those with GM crops stressed that they thought there were specific benefits related to these crops. The economic aspects of land management and the improved productivity play an essential role in their thoughts, as well as the simplification offered by this crop to the process for no-till methods. When they were asked why they decided to grow GM crops, a number of answers shared the same content: 
 "GM soy is a watershed. (...) Before, we used to use a large number of chemical pesticides to kill the same number of weeds, and even then we didn't kill them. Now, with one chemical pesticide (...), glyphosate, we kill everything. It's much simpler, compared with before. (...) There is a difference in costs in terms of the agricultural labor." (3-3) 
 "With glyphosate, it's easier to earn money as you don't have pests taking over... it's much more profitable..." (5-2) 
 Among the advantages offered by GM soy, different farmers stressed its ability to grow even in adverse conditions. However, many have a different opinion of GM maize. When asked why they still grew traditional maize instead of genetically modified maize, they argued that the seed is cheaper and generally you merely have to monitor the plot to identify any potential pests and if any are identified, you can spray the area with pesticide. Furthermore, according to the farmers, it is not possible to choose between conventional soy and GM soy in Argentina at the moment, stressing that there is no way to go back to conventional soy: 
 "Traditional soy is not available any more. It is no longer on the market." (3-4) "You can't go back. (...) It's easier, quicker. (...), if we had to go back to the traditional way of growing it, it would be much more expensive and less safe in a number of aspects, the supposed soy revolution would not be possible, which means otherwise it would be much more difficult to colonize areas. (2-3) 
 As regards the mass uptake of GM crops in Argentina and the process of traditional crops disappearing, some participants - mainly the well-informed and politically active Bragado group - highlighted a combination of factors, such as the clear-cut economic benefits, the country's situation and the strategies adopted by Monsanto: 
 "(...) I'd imagine that 95% or 98% of Argentina's soy is transgenic (...) I would say that maybe they (the multinationals) sell us a package and tie us in to this package, Monsanto perhaps, maybe it isn't so easy to sell it in other parts of the world with different legislation..." (2-4) 
 "It seems that this is the result of a number of factors. In reality, the justification for transgenic products doing so well in Argentina is an economic question. In the context of a country like this, which generally sees a lot of variation, we have the price of agricultural inputs which can change by approximately 30% from one harvest to the next, and thus the chemical pesticide market would become prohibitive for producers. This technology therefore came along, it was very good and we noted that with a lot less money, you could get higher dividends. That's how this country works, it's all related to money." (2-7) 
 Although the general comments were in favor of the benefits of GM soy, some of the participants highlighted drawbacks that will be reflected on shortly, such as the increased price of seeds and possible risks to health and the environment. In addition, one concern that was raised during the discussions was the reorganization of the social structure as a "collateral effect": there are ever fewer farmers in the countryside, the number of small farmers has fallen and the land for growing soy is concentrated in all but a few hands, generally large companies that lease or purchase the land. 
 Risks associated with GM technology (health, environment) 
 Perception of the risks linked to GM technology did not appear to be clearly defined among the subjects. In fact, few accounts expressed concern in this regard. The feeling of doubt and uncertainty was clearer. 
 "It seems that as these are organisms with a virus or genes from other things that are resistant to some pesticides and other things, they can produce an imbalance in the human body or in organisms that makes the body more resistant, for instance, to some medicines, some antibiotics. In other words, they can carry across into the human organism and harm us." (5-5) 
 One general characteristic among groups was the discursive overlapping of, on the one hand, the risks associated with GM crops and, on the other, the risks to the environment and health from pesticides. The perception of risks is very clear in this regard and generally there are no doubts about the harm caused by use and abuse of chemical substances on crops. When we asked if there were any risks from growing genetically modified crops, one person answered: 
 "There are risks, yes. I think they affect nature and the soil. We haven't observed this here so clearly, but in countries that have been using them for longer, there are serious problems of aquifer contamination. Everything is a chemical substance..." (3-5) 
 Among the better informed farmers (the Bragado group, for example), an association can be observed between GM crops and pesticides when risks were discussed - in this case, not through overlapping, but as an association (often explicitly mentioned). In the following accounts, participants showed different views of the risks to health: 
 "I'm not worried about transgenics as a whole because, within transgenics, there are transgenic products that are designed to offer solutions to health problems, both for animals and plants. The major question is the widespread use and lack of control, as we can see with soy (...) when it needs to be sprayed, they spray it, regardless of whether any humans are nearby." (2-5) 
 "The question is not 'to grow or not to grow GM crops', but what they do to grow GM crops. The chemical substances used, which are tipped on the soil for it to grow, for the soy to grow. They use a lot of things and I don't know much about them, but the soil is dying. This is due to the chemical substances." (5-6) 
 Among the well-informed respondents, different perceptions were identified as to the risks pertaining to specific applications of genetically modified plants: 
 "I believe that BT is worse than inserting the RR gene as a genetic modification, right? (...) I trust less a modification to insert BT, which kills insects, than inserting a drug that kills nothing, what it does is act as a catalyst to speed up the plant's calcification. (...) BT produces a substance that kills insects, it is an insecticide. This is much more dangerous. That worries me much more than RR." (2-7) 
 We also asked if farmers would plant GM crops if there was scientific evidence of the risks or a legal ban. The majority of the accounts demonstrated more concern with regard to the economic question: 
 "I think that they [the farmers] will plant them, as they are producers that are much more interested in having a 4 x 4 pick-up truck (...) (4-3) 
 "I think that the first thing that they will say is "I'm sorry, what you're saying is correct, but what am I going to eat? I need to plant them." (...), and they will plant them [GM crops]. They won't look for other alternatives." (4-7) 
 One strategy to "justify" the possibility of planting GM crops even if there were proof of the risks was to say that each social stakeholder has a different role in society and that the main role of farmers is to sow: 
 "It is, that's right. As producers, this is beyond our remit. We grow [GM crops] not because they are in fashion, but because they are more profitable and provide better results. It is up to the State to assess if they are dangerous to health and, if so, they should withdraw them from the market (...) and they will be replaced by something else. But this is out of our reach, there is nothing we can do." (2-6) 
 It should be pointed out that in different cases, the decision to continue producing genetically modified crops, even with proof of the risks or bans, is also presented as a consequence of its context and as the only available alternative. In this regard, the following dialogue is clear: 
 "Maybe I'm being a bit dramatic... The thing is that we know that... they are messing up the environment, but there is no other option. Here in Gualeguay, for example, 30% of the population works for xxxx [name of a local company] and everyone knows that it is contaminating the river." (5-4) 
 "Yes, producers know what should be done to preserve the soil. Business is... well, everything is steered by the economic policy set by the government for the sector, so what counts most for the decision is the cost." (5-1) 
 Nevertheless, we also find those that agree that economic aspects have the most bearing on the decision for the majority of farmers but who are against this position: 
 "I don't share this point of view that "everything is done in the name of economic profit". (...) I know what we can do to get more profit; I've just decided not to." (2-4) 
 Some participants also expressed the view that the decision whether to plant GM crops is not based on proof of the risks or on the government's legal measures but actually on whether a consumer market exists for the genetically modified crops. In this regard, some of the farmers said that they would stop growing GM plants if there was no way to sell them. 
 Social stakeholders that benefit from GM crops 
 The question of which social stakeholder(s) (small farmers or national/multinational biotechnology industries) benefit the most from GM crops provoked controversy in the groups. The majority stressed that there was no doubt that the major companies benefit most and at the expense of the others. According to the accounts, these "others" are mainly small farmers and/or society as a whole. Society is deemed to be affected, for instance, when potential health risks are covered up so as to protect profits: 
 "There are some companies that are analyzing the damage transgenic products may or may not cause, but a big company like Monsanto avoids releasing this information to the public... And, yes, there are problems for the environment and human beings..." (5-5) 
 The payment of royalties was also referred to as a source of profit for some, i.e., for the company with a captive market: 
 "Monsanto is the one with the patent and for this reason they have a stranglehold on virtually everyone that uses soy. (...) Firstly, they want to sell you the technology (...) when you are already dependent on the technology, they start demanding you pay royalties. The problem is that when you become a prisoner to this technology... there is no other option... (...) when the technology is widespread... When you are a captive producer, for the company, it's like having the profit already (...) they are making money out of the producer." (5-1) 
 Furthermore, it was stressed that the trend towards financial speculation is another factor benefitting large companies but not small farmers: 
 "From what I know about transgenics, in the case of soy, I agree that it is easier to produce, it's cheaper, the crop is versatile, the size and the explosion of soy has been a wonderful thing from a productivity point of view. But it is also correct (...) that there are fewer and fewer small producers. (...) it's easier to grow soy with direct planting methods, it's easier for the pools de siembra (large organizers of contract agriculture), which invest capital and don't see this from a production point of view but rather as a financial transaction. Growing soy is a financial transaction. It is seen from a financial point of view, and not from the producers' viewpoint." (2-4) 
 The benefits and the high rates of profitability from RR soy make the question of improving the social structure very important. The ongoing exodus from rural properties worsened by the current situation for agricultural farming is a consequence of different producers renting out their own land to the large corporations, as some of the participants identify: 
 "People that have never lived in rural areas are investing money in the countryside; and on this, those who generally worked in agriculture have to sell up because they pay much more." (3-6) 
 "Small farmers (...) are finished with. Yesterday, I was reading a report: 3% of Argentina's producers plant 70% of the country's total soy. So you can see what it's like: the other 97% grow 30% [of the soy]." (3-4) 
 During the discussions with the groups on soy production, different participants raised concerns about social changes in the countryside. To sum up, the concerns revolved around the rural exodus, the drop in work for agricultural workers and the fact that producers let out their land and, by doing so, are losing their identity and no longer feel like they belong to the land. 
 Farmers' participation in the decision-making process 
 The request to be heard in the decision-making process for questions related to agricultural legislation was common to the groups, although their members considered this situation to be difficult to achieve, partly due to their marginal situation in society: 
 "They don't listen to us. The government looks the other way, producers are not engaged." (3-3) 
 "They listen to us, but do not pay attention to what we say." (4-7) 
 "We should be listened to but we are the last link in the chain..." (1-11) 
 However, when we asked if they had really tried to intervene in the decision-making process, we were given different answers which can be divided into five general groups: (1) those who think it is important that farmers be heard and, in practical terms, try to participate by going to meetings, demonstrations, etc.; (2) those who agree with the need to be heard but who do nothing in particular to fulfill this objective; (3) those who also agree but don't know how they could take part; (4) those who think taking part in the decision-making process is not the farmers' social role, but that of policy makers; (5) those who do not understand what it means to be heard in the decision-making process and who confuse this with receiving what they consider basic needs from the government: electricity, material support, financial incentives, etc. Let us examine these categories in more detail, starting with the final one. The Pereyra group was a clear example of the fifth attitude where participation was associated with support and assistance. 
 "What we want here is electricity and treated water." (1-4) 
 Also in the Pereyra group, the farmers openly vented their feelings about being excluded by the system, of things going from bad to worse as they are not landowners and are, for the most part, foreigners originally from Bolivia: 
 "We want them to help us, to listen to us!" (1-6) 
 "We're not the owners [of the land], maybe that's why we don't have a voice or a vote." (1-1) 
 "Sometimes we feel like intruders, like people without any rights ..." (1-5). 
 An alternative way of identifying ways and means of participating, with a more active approach, was reported by the Gualeguay group, for whom the means of participating are created by the farmers themselves and not by government initiative. In this group, as in others, civil society organizations like the Argentinean Agrarian Federation and the Argentinean Rural Confederation are recognized as important channels, although farmers do not agree with the way in which these organizations separate farmers when representing them into groups based on their scale of production. As expected, those who are not affiliated to the Argentinean Agrarian Federation (such as the participants in the Junín and Gualeguay groups) expressed a more critical opinion in terms of the degree to which they feel it represents them in comparison to those who are affiliated (such as in the Villa Ángela and Bragado groups, whose participants were asked to take part in the focal groups by the Federation): 
 "We may identify with their interests but not with their strategies of fighting for them. Let's just say (...) they haven't had much success in drawing attention to our cause. And when there is discontent, everyone should join arms, everyone linked to agriculture and livestock farming, regardless of what scale, otherwise they won't listen to us..." (5-4) 
 It should be pointed out, however, that both the subjects who are affiliated to the Argentinean Agrarian Federation and those who are not are skeptical about the tangible results that can be achieved through small farmers taking part. The widespread belief is that "everything is already written or decided", thereby a means of participation that is not fully materialized or a false idea of participation is created, with only the Argentinean Agrarian Federation able to convey the issues that are of concern to small farmers: 
 "But at meetings, unfortunately, even though we take part, everything has already been decided before the meeting. We take part to find out what's going on, but..." (4-4) 
 The skepticism about being able to exert any influence by taking part at these meetings or demonstrations led some subjects to state that the only way to be heard was to use radical measures: 
 "To be heard, we have to do what the others do: block the roads! But we can't leave our jobs!" (1-5) 
 The same type of uncertainty, even among those who do take part, is also reflected in the perception of to what extent they feel represented by the politicians for whom they vote, in other words, if these politicians pay attention to farmers' needs when drafting changes or legislation. Different farmers said that the majority of politicians only want to win votes, without making any de facto changes to satisfy farmers' needs. 
 Final considerations 
 Since their introduction in the mid-1990s, the production of GM crops in Argentina has increased rapidly. In particular, the extremely fast adoption of RR soy placed the country on the world leader board for soy production and exports. This would suggest that local farmers are satisfied with this innovative technology. Having this type of positive attitude towards soy is not necessarily related to the fact that the soy is genetically modified, but rather to the increased profits from the soy market and the way it dovetails perfectly with direct planting methods. Moreover, the positive view of genetically modified soy has spread to other crops: currently, the majority of the maize and cotton produced in the country is genetically modified. 
 Although a generally favorable attitude remains after more than a decade, a number of fears were identified surrounding the environmental and social impacts of growing genetically modified organisms. In the former, these include the emergence of herbicide-resistant weeds and problems caused by more intensive agriculture and soy "monoculture", such as the loss of soil nutrients. Another negative concern is deforestation, mainly in the process known as the "pampeanization"" of Argentina: crops that are traditionally grown in the Pampean areas have shifted northwards, causing deforestation and growth in the huge areas occupied by soy monoculture. Among the perceived social impacts is the new social trend spurred on by the aggressive practices of private corporations bent on planting soy on land traditionally belonging to poor families or small farmers, and their contribution towards increasing the concentration of land, the rural exodus and the loss of lay knowledge related to traditional agriculture. Significant differences have emerged among those who use GM crops and those who do not in terms of knowing what this entails and being able to hold a discussion on the subject. However, there is even confusion in the ranks of those who grow GM, such as, for example, on the differences between "transgenics", "genetic improvement" and "hybrid plants". 
 As for the level of knowledge about the potential environmental and social damage or risks, the majority of the sample showed a pragmatic approach: the plants are more profitable and require less work, thus generally there is no major dilemma about growing them. The generally favorable attitude goes hand-in-hand with other attitudes on transgenic plants, such as the human consumption of genetically modified food or the use of GM technology for research purposes in medicine, provided control procedures and access to clear information are improved. 
 The majority of participants in our study agreed that they should be heard in the decision-making process for agricultural questions, but also recognized the difficulties in achieving this objective. In fact, there were only a few positive responses when we asked if they had actually tried to be actively involved in some kind of participation mechanism. In some cases, the lack of information on how to take part or their own self-exclusion from decision-making circles were the reasons given for remaining outside the process. In other cases, the lack of participation was clearly related to their own position as small farmers, the "last link in the chain", which would imply a serious obstacle to them having their voices heard. This attitude acts as a disincentive to a certain extent, except among those who use it as a motive for supporting more radical measures - including the use of force, such as blocking highways -in order to be heard. These were exactly the measures taken in mid-2008, in what became known as the "countryside rebellion", where the four agricultural producers' associations in Argentina united and blocked roads in response to export taxes on soy, which affected the food supply and led to the measure being suspended. 
 Notes 
 i "(...) Where there are threats of serious or irreversible environmental damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost effective measures to prevent degradation" (UNCED, 1992). 
 ii In 2007, at the time that this study was conducted, Argentina was ranked second worldwide in terms of millions of hectares planted with GM crops (19.1 million), surpassed only by the USA (57.7 million) (James, 2007). 
 iii Argentina's wealth is distributed unevenly throughout the country, with, historically, a significant share of economic activity in certain areas (the metropolitan region of Buenos Aires and others, such as Santa Fé and Córdoba). 
 References 
 ALMEIDA, C.; MASSARANI, L. O modo de organização argumentativo no discurso de pequenos agricultores sobre cultivos transgênicos. Diadorim, v.10, 2011.         [ Links ] 
 ALTIERI, M.; ROSSET, P. Strengthening the case for why biotechnology will not help the Developing World: a response to McGloughlin. AgroBioForum. The Journal of Agrobiotechnology Management & Economics v.2, n.3&4, 1999.         [ Links ] 
 ATKINSON, H.; GREEN, J.; COWGILL, S.; LEVESLEY, A. The case for genetically modified crops with a poverty focus. Trends in Biotechnology, v.19, n.3, 91-96, 2001.         [ Links ] 
 BARSKY, O.; DÁVILA, M. La rebelión del campo. Historia del conflicto agrario argentino. Buenos Aires: Editorial Sudamericana, 2008.         [ Links ] 
 BROOKS, S. Biotechnology and the politics of truth: From the green revolution to an evergreen revolution. Oxford: Blackwell, 2005.         [ Links ] 
 CARVALHO, A. Communicating Climate Change: Discourses, Mediations and Perceptions, Centro de Estudos de Comunicação e Sociedade, Braga, Universidade do Minho, 2008         [ Links ] 
 CHIMMIRI, N.; TUDOR, K.W.; SPAULDING, A.D. An analysis of McLean County, Illinois farmers' perceptions of genetically modified crops. AgroBioForum. The Journal of Agrobiotechnology Management & Economics, v.9, n.3, p.152-165, 2006.         [ Links ] 
 DUNWOODY, S.; GRIFFIN, J. Risk communication, risk beliefs and democracy: the case of agricultural biotechnology. In: BROSSARD, D. et al. (eds.), The public, the media and the agricultural technology, UK, CABI, 2007.         [ Links ] 
 DURANT, JOHN; BAUER, MARTIN E GASKELL, GEORGE (eds.) Biotechnology in the Public Sphere. Londres: Science Museum. 308p, 1998.         [ Links ] 
 FRICKEL, S.; MOORE, K. Prospects and challenges for a new political sociology of science, The New Political Sociology of Science. Institutions, Networks, and Power, eds. Frickel, S y Moore, K., Madison, The University of Minnesota Press, p. 3-31, 2006         [ Links ] 
 GAO - United States General Accounting Office. Report to the Chairman, Subcommittee on Risk Management, Research, and Specialty Crops, Biotechnology: Information on Prices of Genetically Modified Seeds in the United States and Argentina, Committee on Agriculture, House of Representatives, Washington, DC, 2000.         [ Links ] 
 GASKELL, G.; BAUER, M.; DURANT, J.; ALLUM, N. C. Worlds apart? The reception of genetically modified foods in Europe and the US. Science 285: 384-387, 1999.         [ Links ] 
 GUEHLSTORF, C. Understanding the Scope of Farmer Perceptions of Risk: Considering Farmer Opinions on the Use of Genetically Modified (GM) Crops as a Stakeholder Voice. Policy Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics, v.21, n.6, p. 541-558, 2008.         [ Links ] 
 HALL, M., LANGFORD, L. Social Exclusion and Transgenic Technology: The Case of Brazilian Agriculture. Journal of Business Ethics, v.77, n1, p. 45-63, 2008.         [ Links ] 
 HELLER, C. McDonalds, MTV, and Monsanto: Resisting biotechnology in the age of informational capital. Redesigning Life? The Worldwide Challenge of Genetic Engineering, ed. Tokar, B., London, Zed Books, 2001. Disponible em: <http://www.social-ecology.org/learn/library/heller/monsanto>         [ Links ]. 
 JAMES, C. Global Status of Commercialized Biotech/GM crops: 2011 - ISAAA Briefs n. 43, Ithaca: ISAAA, 2011.         [ Links ] 
 JASANOFF, S. Biotechnology and empire: The global power of seeds and science, Osiris, v.21, p. 273-292, 2006.         [ Links ] 
 KITZINGER, Jenny. The Methodology of Focus Group: the Importance of interaction between research participants. Sociology of Health & Illness 16(1): 103-121, 1994.         [ Links ] 
 KITZINGER, Jenny. Introducing focus group. BMJ 311: 299-302, 1995.         [ Links ] 
 MASSARANI, L.; MOREIRA, Ildeu. Attitudes towards genetics: a case study among Brazilian high school students. Public Understanding of Science, Londres, v. 14, n.2, p. 201-212, 2005.         [ Links ] 
 McGLOUGHLIN, M. Ten reasons why biotechnology will be important in the developing world. In: SHERLOCK, N., MORREY, J. (Eds.), Ethical issues in biotechnology. Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 1999.         [ Links ] 
 MIROWSKY, P. y SENT, E-M. The commercialization of science and the response of STS, Handbook of Science and Technology Studies, terceira edição, eds. Hackett, E. J. et al., Cambridge, The MIT Press, p. 635-689, 2008.         [ Links ] 
 MORGAN, D. Focus groups as qualitative research. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, 1997.         [ Links ] 
 MUCCI, A., HOUGH, G. Perceptions of genetically modified foods by consumers in Argentina, Food Quality and Preference, v.15, n.1, p.43-51, 2004.         [ Links ] 
 PENNA, J., LEMA, D. Adoption of herbicide tolerant soybeans in Argentina: an economic analysis. In KALITZANDONAKES, N. (ed.) The Economic and Environmental Impacts of Agrobiotechnology. A global Perspective. New York: Kluwer Academic, 2003. p. 203-221.         [ Links ] 
 PRIEST, Susanna Hornig. US Opinion divided over biotechnology? Nature Biotechnol. 18: 939-942, 2000.         [ Links ] 
 PRIEST, Susanna Hornig. A grain of truth - The media, the public, and the biotechnology. Boston e Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers Inc. 141p., 2001.         [ Links ] 
 QAIM, M., TRAXLER, G. Roundup ready soybeans in Argentina: farm level and aggregate welfare effects. Agricultural Economics, n.32, p. 73-86, 2005.         [ Links ] 
 SAGPyA. Consultas sobre la biotecnología en la Argentina. Proyecto SAGPyA / UNEP GEF, Buenos Aires, 2003.         [ Links ] 
 SECYT. Los argentinos y su visión de la ciencia y la tecnología. Buenos Aires: Ministerio de Educación, Ciencia y Tecnología, 2004.         [ Links ] 
 STONE, G.D. Social Constraints on Crop Biotechnology in Developing Countries. AgroBioForum. The Journal of Agrobiotechnology Management & Economics, v.7, n.1&2, 2004.         [ Links ] 
 STIRLING, A. "Risk, precaution and science: towards a more constructive policy debate", EMBO Reports, 8:4, 309-315, 2007.         [ Links ] 
 TRIGO, E.J., CAP, E.J. The impact of the introduction of transgenic crops in Argentinean agriculture, AgroBioForum. The Journal of Agrobiotechnology Management & Economics, v.6, n.3, p.87-94, 2003.         [ Links ] 
 VARA, A. Transgénicos en Argentina: más allá del boom de la soja, Revista CTS, n.3, v.1, 2004.         [ Links ] 
 Fighting the seed monopoly: 'We want to make free seed a sort of meme' 
 The Open Source Seed Initiative aims to provide an alternative to the patent-protected seeds sold by major producers such as Monsanto and DuPont 
 Sarah Shemkus 
 Fri 2 May 2014 16.00 BST First published on Fri 2 May 2014 16.00 BST 
 By trade, Jack Kloppenburg is a sociologist and a professor at the University of Wisconsin. Lately, however, his job has entailed packaging seeds and mailing them to farmers, in addition to his normal teaching and grading duties. 
 This change in routine was prompted by the unexpected popularity of the recently launched Open Source Seed Initiative (OSSI) a project spearheaded by Kloppenburg and Wisconsin horticulture professor Irwin Goldman. In mid-April, the initiative released 36 seed varieties, all free from the patent restrictions that limit much of the seed commercially available today. 
 "The thing went viral and it's all over the place now," Kloppenburg said. "We got 230 orders from eight countries, when we hadn't even anticipated selling any seed." 
 The initiative's goal is to provide an alternative to the patent-protected seeds sold by major producers such as Monsanto and DuPont, most of which require buyers to sign agreements that create strict limits on how the seed can be used. Farmers are generally prohibited from saving seed from their crops to plant the following year, for example; new seeds must be purchased for each planting. 
 Seed giants like Monsanto argue that this approach encourages innovation by allowing companies to protect the investment of time and money they put into developing new plant varieties. Kloppenburg and his OSSI partners, however, find the practice unsettling. 
 "They are using intellectual property rights, especially patents, to separate farmers from a fundamental means of production," he said. "Control of the seed is, in many ways, control over the entire food supply." 
 Furthermore, the concentration of the industry into a few big players – just three companies sell more than half the seeds on the market, according to the Center for Food Safety – means that the biological diversity of crops is declining, making our food supply less likely to adapt well to climate change, he said. 
 Looking for solutions to these concerns, OSSI drew inspiration from the open-source software movement, which creates computer code available to anyone to study, modify, or distribute. Much open-source software is regulated by legally binding licenses that give users wide latitude to alter and even commercialize the code. 
 To adapt the open source concept to seeds, OSSI decided to use a less formal pledge rather than a licensing system. Each packet of OSSI seeds sold will be printed with a statement that reads, in part, "By opening this packet, you pledge that you will not restrict others' use of these seeds and their derivatives by patents, licenses, or any other means. You pledge that if you transfer these seeds or their derivatives you will acknowledge the source of these seeds and accompany your transfer with this pledge." 
 Though the pledge does not allow OSSI to take violators to court, Kloppenburg feels that this less restrictive approach is more within the spirit of the project, he said. He hopes the pledge will kickstart a movement toward seeds unrestricted by patents and legal agreements; he can, he said, imagine a day when "open-source seed" is a term used to attract sustainability-conscious shoppers in the way the organic label does today. 
 "We don't want to be police," he said. "We want to make free seed a sort of meme, to raise people's consciousness and awareness." 
 Without legal protections keeping open-source seeds from being patented, however, OSSI's approach is unlikely to solve the long-term problems, said Tom Stearns, founder of partner company High Mowing Organic Seeds. The company contributed just one seed to the recent release so that it can start small and assess how the open-source pledge actually functions in the market, he said. 
 "I think this is a great start, but I don't think it's nearly enough," Stearns said. "This is one attempt that I hope will be the beginning of many conversations and many attempts to address the intellectual property challenge." 
 OSSI plans to incorporate as a nonprofit organization, but partners and customers are free to use the open-source seeds to make money, as long as they don't patent any of their developments. 
 The first round of seeds released includes quinoa, peppers, and squash developed by Wild Garden Seed in Oregon, lettuce and kale from Lupine Knoll Farm in Oregon, carrots bred by Goldman, and spelt from High Mowing Organic Seeds in Vermont. Currently, the initiative is selling sample packs of 15 seeds for $25 each, but the plan is eventually to link to individual partner breeders through the site, so customers can buy directly, Kloppenburg said. 
 "We're not necessarily in it to make as much money as we can," he said. "We want to generate new options." 
 Sarah Shemkus is a freelance reporter and editor who writes about business, technology, food and the places where they all meet. Find her on Twitter at @shemkus 
 Associate Professor and DST/NRF Bio-economy Research Chair, University of Cape Town 
 Disclosure statement 
 Rachel Wynberg works for the University of Cape Town, South Africa where she holds a research chair funded by the Department of Science and Technology and National Research Foundation. Through the University of Cape Town, she forms part of the Seed and Knowledge Initiative (SKI) which represents an innovative collaboration between universities, practitioners and a range of NGOs across southern Africa to revive and enhance traditional seed and knowledge systems and to deepen understanding about their functioning. Founding partners include Biowatch South Africa, the University of Cape Town, and EarthLore Foundation. SKI also partners with Ukuvuna in South Africa; the Chikukwa Ecological Land Use Community Trust (CELUCT), Towards Sustainable Use of Resources Organisation (TSURO), Zimbabwe Smallholder Organic Farmers Forum (ZIMSOFF) and Participatory Organic Research Extension and Training (PORET) in Zimbabwe; the Zambia Alliance for Agroecology and Biodiversity Conservation (ZAABC), Community Technology Development Trust (CTDT) and ReScope in Zambia; and Soils, Food and Healthy Communities (SFHC) in Malawi. Rachel serves on the Boards of Biowatch South Africa, Environmental Monitoring Group and was previously VIce Chair of the Board of PhytoTrade Africa. This article is written in her personal capacity and does not represent the views of any of these organisations. No benefit will accrue to any organisation. 
 The Conversation UK receives funding from Hefce, Hefcw, SAGE, SFC, RCUK, The Nuffield Foundation, The Ogden Trust, The Royal Society, The Wellcome Trust, Esmée Fairbairn Foundation and The Alliance for Useful Evidence, as well as sixty five university members. 
 Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under Creative Commons licence. 
 Seeds are the very essence of life. From those growing a multiplicity of grains, legumes and vegetables to others struggling to produce enough to feed their families, seeds provide the mainstay for Africa’s 500 million small-scale farmers. Seeds are also at the heart of rich and varied cultures. They accompany brides on their nuptial journeys and deliver ancestral blessings for good fortune. 
 But seeds are also under siege as they increasingly become commodified. Since 2000, the growth of the commercial seed market has almost tripled. More than 63% of the world’s commercial seed is now owned by six corporations. New proposed mergers will reduce this to just three. 
 These concentrations of political and economic power not only reduce farmers’ choices, but also signal profound changes for Africa. 
 Hybrid and genetically modified seeds, touted by these giants, are proposed as key drivers in the transformation of African smallholder agriculture. This, even though an increasing body of evidence points to problems associated with their high cost and the resultant debt that farmers incur. 
 Hybrid seeds cannot be replanted from year to year like traditional seed because they lose their vigour. Contracts or “technology agreements” between farmers and seed companies dictate how farmers should grow their crops and force farmers to buy new genetically modified seed each year. 
 These seeds also require expensive and environmentally damaging chemical inputs to be effective. Herbicide tolerant crops, for example, are genetically engineered to be resistant to Roundup Ready – the brand name for the controversial weed-killer known as glyphosate. This means that the herbicide will kill the weeds but not the engineered crop. The seed is therefore only effective if used with Roundup. 
 There are other concerns. Genetically modified crops can contaminate traditional seed and damage generations of on-farm breeding. 
 For these reasons, many question whether seed bred for large-scale industrial agriculture is appropriate for African smallholders. To date, most of Africa’s farmers still rely on traditional seeds. The adoption of hybrid and genetically modified seed has been low. Only three African countries – South Africa, Burkina Faso and Sudan – have introduced genetically modified seed, including insect resistant cotton and maize and herbicide tolerant maize and soybean. 
 Problems with current approaches 
 The new wave of philanthropy sweeping the continent, such the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa programmes, promote the adoption of hybrid and genetically modified seed and chemical inputs. 
 In a similar fashion, institutions such as the World Bank, the New Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition and large consumer companies are pursuing quick-fix solutions such as bio-fortification. This is a process to improve the nutritional quality of food through plant breeding or genetic modification. Many have expressed concern that other approaches based on diverse farming systems and diets are being overlooked in the process. 
 The International Panel of Experts on Sustainable Food Systems is an initiative to inform and advise the policy debate on how to reform food systems across the world. It recently concluded that both food and nutritional security are better served by an approach which focuses on: 
 Diverse agro-ecological systems that support diversity and sustainability. This would move away from reliance on a handful of crops grown in monocultures – a single crop grown at the same time – at severe cost to the environment due to the loss of biodiversity and intensive use of water, pesticides and fertilisers; 
 Reducing the carbon footprint of agriculture; and, 
 Rebuilding soil fertility and sustaining yields over time. 
 Traditional seed matters 
 Across Africa there is growing evidence of the impacts of seed industrialisation for smallholder farmers. In Malawi, for example, local varieties are increasingly unavailable because of neoliberal agricultural reforms that have subsidised fertilisers and hybrid seeds and promoted cash crops. In Burkina Faso, a decision has been made to completely phase out genetically modified cotton due to its inferior lint quality. This has not only affected small-scale farmers. It has also jeopardised West Africa’s world cotton market advantage. 
 South Africa has some 2.3 million small-scale farmers. They cultivate a combination of traditional seeds passed on for generations, with some also growing commercial hybrid and genetically modified seeds. 
 Traditional seed that is planted varies according to the climate, soil and context. It typically includes grains such as millet, sorghum, and maize. There’s also a variety of legumes – mung beans, cowpeas, peanuts and jugo beans – and indigenous leafy vegetables like morogo. 
 Recent research conducted in KwaZulu-Natal, a province on South Africa’s east coast, revealed that small-scale farmers prefer traditional seeds for the following reasons: 
 They produce hardy and good yields; 
 They have high nutritional value; 
 They save money as the seed is saved and replanted; 
 They reduce the need for costly inputs such as pesticides and fertilisers because they are often produced in closed-loop agroecological farming systems; 
 They are considered more resistant and resilient to drought and extreme climate; 
 They are important for cultural and historical reasons. Seed selection, saving and exchange cement social bonds in farming communities; and 
 They serve as a form of “insurance” in bad years. And, because they can be traded, they are a household asset. 
 There are also challenges with multiplying and saving seed. Traditional seed preservation methods such as ash or cow dung are still prevalent. But knowledge about these techniques is dying out – particularly given that more young people are migrating to urban centres. 
 There are some solutions. 
 Governments need to recognise the importance of farmer-led seed systems for food security. They should act to prevent inappropriate interventions. 
 Extension services need to provide independent advice that is relevant to farmers’ needs rather than relying on seed and agrichemical companies. 
 Gene banks need to be reimagined to serve the needs of smallholder farmers. Both science and traditional knowledge need to be used to find solutions. 
 Careers based on agroecology need to be created so that young people become excited to get involved. 
 These actions would contribute to returning seed production and knowledge to the hands of local communities, inspiring a shift towards ecologically sustainable and just agricultural futures. 
 This article reflects discussions at a seminar convened by the Seed and Knowledge Initiative (SKI) in September 2016. 
 Stay informed and subscribe to our free daily newsletter and get the latest analysis and commentary directly in your inbox. 
 One of the sad things about modern agriculture is how few strains of food we eat in much of the world. 
 Since the 1990s, three-quarters of the world's plant genetic diversity has been lost, according to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) because big agriculture successfully has convinced farmers to plant monocultures that consist of a few genetically uniform, high-yielding crops, reports Reuters. 
 Today, 75 percent of the world's food comes from just 12 plants and five animal species, said FAO. 
 Much has been written about the nutritional problems that stem from this, the loss of pollinators that thrive on diversity, the inability to grow crops during severe drought and the much greater use of pesticides that comes with monoculture crops. 
 Small farmers know enough to rotate through versions of staple crops, and to plant several kinds of crops at the same time to increase resiliency. In other words, they farm organically. 
 By diversifying food production instead of limiting it, we can increase the nutritional value of foods and protect our food systems from the increasing shocks to the system from climate change. 
 So far, only South Africa, Egypt, Burkina Faso and Sudan allow commercial GMO crops. While Europe and other regions have developed strong biosafety laws, the GMO industry is rushing to take advantage of the lack of regulation in Africa. 
 The vast majority of farmers in Africa are small — they can't afford to buy expensive GMO seeds or the fertilizer/ pesticide treadmill they require. ButMonsanto et. al. have very effective marketing campaigns spinning that GMOs provide food security; the ability to produce more on less land, in an environmentally safe fashion; and that a large population can't be fed using traditionally ways of farming. 
 Take the Water Efficient Maize for Africa program, a partnership between the Gates Foundation and Monsanto. The idea was to introduce in five pilot countries drought-tolerant maize varieties — the traditional staple food — including Monsanto's MON810, a plant that produces its own pesticide. 
 The authors of "Manipulate and Mislead: How GMOs Are Infiltrating Africa" stress that introducing GMOs goes hand-in-hand with reshaping government policy. "The [WEMA] project has refused to run field trials in Tanzania and Mozambique until those countries amend their 'strict liability laws,' which would make WEMA, and future companies selling GMOs, liable for any damages they may cause," they said. 
 "WEMA has also complained to governments about clauses in their law that require assessment of socio-economic impacts of GMOs, saying that assessment and approvals should be based solely on hard science, which is also often influenced or financed by the industry." 
 "The majority of these farmers are women, who have scant access to finance or secure land tenure," the authors continue. "That they still manage to provide the lion's share of the continents' food, usually without formal seed, chemicals, mechanization, irrigation or subsidies, is testament to their resilience and innovation. 
 "African farmers have a lot to lose from the introduction of GMOs: the rich diversity of African agriculture, its robust resilience and the social cohesion engendered through cultures of sharing and collective effort could be replaced by a handful of monotonous commodity crops owned by foreign masters. 
 "It may be tempting to believe that hunger can be solved with technology, but African social movements have shown that skewed power relations are the bedrock of hunger, such as unfair trade agreements and subsidies that perennially entrench poverty, or the patenting of seed and imposition of expensive and patented technology onto the world's most vulnerable and risk averse communities. 
 "Without changing these fundamental power relationships and handing control over food production to smallholders in Africa, hunger cannot be eradicated. A global movement is growing and demanding that governments support small-scale food producers and agroecology instead of corporate agriculture, an agricultural system that is based on collaboration with nature and is appropriate for small scale production, where producers are free to plant and exchange seeds and operate in strong local markets." 
 Last year, the Global GMO-Free Coalition formed to stop the GMO industry from taking over the world's food supply. 
 "The agrochemical-based global farming system, infatuated as it is by GMOs, is waging a full-scale chemical war against the biosphere, of which we form an inseparable part," said Sayer Ji, founder of US-based GreenMedInfo. "Calling this farming is the ultimate absurdity, as this food production system requires the inevitable destruction of the soil, the biodiversity and even the producers and consumers who eventually must succumb to suboptimal nutrition and poisoning." 
 There are plenty of reasons to join the cause to label or eliminate foods that contain genetically modified ingredients: 
 First of all, just because something is deemed legal by the government does not make it safe for humans. Ask any indigenous person in any country: how many things deemed “legal” have done harm to their cultures and communities? GMOs are no different. 
 Take Hawaii, for example. Last year the chain of islands organized several large demonstrations to speak out against the biotech companies trying to make the island state their home. Because Hawaii is geographically isolated and has an ideal growing climate, plus abundant natural resources, five of the world’s biggest biotech companies have targeted the islands as their testing field for chemical and food engineering. What does this mean? Well, to Hawaiians it means that over 70 different chemicals have been sprayed onto genetically engineered crops during field tests that went undisclosed to the public—meaning the surrounding communities were given no warning nor a chance to protect themselves from exposure through wind, water or contaminated soil. Some of these field tests took place near homes and schools. All of this in a state where adult on-set diabetes and cancer rates have increased over the last 10 years. 
 Many native Hawaiians are actively speaking out against the genetic modification of their food supply, stating that GMOs are sacrilegious to their indigenous culture. Miliani B. Strask, a native Hawaiian attorney wrote, “For Hawaii’s indigenous peoples, the concepts underlying genetic manipulation of life forms are offensive and contrary to the cultural values of aloha ‘??ina [love for the land].” 
 Across the ocean in a vastly different climate, the Diné are in accord. In 2013 The Navajo Nation declared themselves to be a GMO and pesticide-free nation. This encompasses 10 million acres of land and more than 250,000 people. Their reasoning? In part: Corn is sacred. 
 In the year 2000, only 25 percent of the corn growing in the United States was genetically modified. In 2013 that number was up to 90 percent. Along with more GMO corn comes more super-weeds and super-pests adapting to live alongside the corn, which then needs even more intense super-chemicals to kill them off. Biotech companies like Monsanto have even been allowed to patent their seeds. If their seeds blow into your field and begin to grow? You owe them money. This has led to thousands of farmers in India to take their own life as they spiral into a debt they cannot pay off. 
 In their resolution against GMOs and pesticides, the Dine cited the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, specifically Article 31, which states: 
 “Indigenous Peoples have the right to maintain, control, protect, and develop their cultural heritage, traditional knowledge, and traditional cultural expressions, as well as the manifestations of their sciences, technologies, and cultures, including . . . seeds, medicines, knowledge of the properties of fauna and flora . . .” 
 GMOs may cause yet-unknown health consequences, but as indigenous people they may also threaten cultural heritage, tradition and even sovereignty. Corn IS sacred. It is our mother and our nurturer. We cannot stand idly by as she is mutated and commoditized into something that poisons the land, the water and the people. 
 Over 61 countries, covering 40 percent of the world’s population and all of the European Union already label genetically modified foods. And in 50 countries there are severe restrictions or outright bans of GMOs—Canada and the United States are not among any of these countries. Whether you believe genetically modified food can cause cancer or not, this is one cause worth standing up for: plant heirloom seeds in your garden, don’t use pesticides and herbicides, and vote to label GMO foods. If labeling GMO foods isn’t on your local ballot, fight to get it on there. 
 Darla Antoine is an enrolled member of the Okanagan Indian Band in British Columbia and grew up in Eastern Washington State. For three years, she worked as a newspaper reporter in the Midwest, reporting on issues relevant to the Native and Hispanic communities, and most recently served as a producer for Native America Calling. In 2011, she moved to Costa Rica, where she currently lives with her husband and their infant son. She lives on an organic and sustainable farm in the “cloud forest”—the highlands of Costa Rica, 9,000 feet above sea level. Due to the high elevation, the conditions for farming and gardening are similar to that of the Pacific Northwest—cold and rainy for most of the year with a short growing season. Antoine has an herb garden, green house, a bee hive, cows, a goat, and two trout ponds stocked with hundreds of rainbow trout. 
 The Worst Thing About GMOs Is That They're Not In the Public Domain 
 The biggest threat posed by genetically modified foods is not to human health but to the future of farming itself. 
 The biggest threat posed by genetically modified foods is not to human health—there are plenty of reasons to be adamant in observing the impact of GMOs, but there’s not much credible science suggesting current strains pose any great risk—but to the future of farming itself. 
 Three biotech firms, Monsanto, DuPont, and Syngenta, control 53% of the world’s commercial seed market. Since winning the right to patent their genetically engineered seeds, they have been ruthless in “protecting” their patents, suing small businesses and farmers they claim used their seeds without paying up. 
 A new report, Seed Giants vs. U.S. Farmers (pdf), details the damage they’ve done. Here’s a quick list of some of the stats: 
 Monsanto alone has brought 142 lawsuits against 410 farmers and 56 small businesses 
 As a result, it has extracted $23 million from American small farmers and businesses 
 Now, 93% of soybeans planted in the U.S. are now genetically modified 
 So are 86% of corn crops 
 Those same three big ag firms that control 53% of the global market control 73% of the American market 
 Taken together, those stats paint a familiarly ominous portrait—the vast corporate consolidation of the American seed market. If you’re a farmer in the U.S., you’re left with dwindling options—go organic, or buy ruthlessly patent-protected GMOs. But the most egregious trend evident here is the privatization of seeds themselves. 
 Debbie Backer, a co-author of the report and expert with the Save Our Seeds group, told the Guardian that “Corporations did not create seeds and many are challenging the existing patent system that allows private companies to assert ownership over a resource that is vital to survival and that historically has been in the public domain.” It wasn't until the mid-90s that patent-protected GMO seeds started sucking up market share: 
 That has always been the ugly heart of the GMO industry, and for good reason. GMO defenders are often fond of saying that humans have been “genetically engineering” crops for ages, by cross-pollinating and hybridizing and so on and so forth, and that biotech firms are just speeding up the process. Well, the obvious difference is that for 99.99% of human history, those farmers never claimed the rights to their particular brand of crop and demanded everyone else pay royalties on their “creations.” Which is exactly what Monsanto, DuPont, and co. are doing now—in fact, their business model depends on it. 
 For their part, the biotech ag firms claim that they need to protect those revenue streams to continue their research. On its website, Monsanto offers a rebuttal. 
 If ... private biotech firms can no longer rely on the patent system to protect their ability to recoup their R&D costs by preventing such replication, there will be no financial incentive to continue investing in technologies with easily replicable features. In the agriculture sector alone, Monsanto and its competitors are spending billions of dollars annually on R&D in agricultural biotechnology, pursuing traits that make crops higher yielding and more resistant to various environmental stresses, and to make grains with increased nutritional value 
 Therefore Monsanto must sue the pants off of anyone who might be using their seed, or a variation of it, so that it can protect its revenue streams, which it ostensibly needs to keep making the world a better place with new and improved products. 
 But as the report makes clear, seeds and seed innovation have historically been in the public domain, where everyone could benefit equally from farmers’ and scientists’ improvements—not primarily corporate executives. 
 Most major new crop varieties developed throughout the 20th century owe their origin to publicly funded agricultural research and breeding. In 1980, the share of overall U.S. crop acreage planted with public sector seed was 70 percent for soybeans and 72-85 percent for various types of wheat. 
 Elsewhere, SOS points out that the "vast majority of plant improvement in American history has been accomplished by farmers and public sector plant breeders, and these tremendous advances were made without any system of 'innovation-promoting' intellectual property protection for plants." 
 Now especially, when we're deep into the information age, we’ve seen time and again the power of open, crowd-sourced research and widespread collaboration. There’s only one advantage to keeping GMO seed DNA secret, under patent lock, and that’s to protect Monsanto’s wealth-generating revenue stream. Which is to be expected—that’s what profiteering corporations are built to do. 
 But it’s also why they have no business hoarding seeds. Seeds are not smartphones or new kinds of plastic or a better mousetrap. Seeds are an existential necessity. If there's anything that should be returned to the public sector, it's genetically modified seeds. If ever there was a practice that should be open and transparent and subject to as much daylight as possible, it's this. Ideally, seed DNA should not just be made public, but ultra-public. Imagine a Human Genome Project for seeds of the top crops—imagine the innovation that might spur. As Obama pointed out in the State of the Union address last night, the HGP has generated $140 in private capital for every $1 invested by the public. And two years ago, an application to patent a human gene was shut down by the Justice Department—patent lawyers and the biotech industry jeered, but doctors and scientists cheered. 
 Meanwhile, Monsanto and DuPont and co. keep their patent-protected GMO seedstock under lock and key, amassing private profits and obscuring potential gains for the public at large. 
1

Biocultural Diversity Toolkit

An Introduction to
Biocultural Diversity

Terr a l in g u a

Biocultural Diversity:
Earth’s Interwoven
Variety

T

he very reason our planet can be said to be
“alive” at all is because there exists here (and
here alone, so far as we know) a profuse variety: of
organisms, of divergent streams of human thought
and behavior, and of geophysical features that provide
a congenial setting for the workings of nature and
culture. All three realms of difference have evolved
so that they interact with and influence one another.
Earth’s interwoven variety – what we call biocultural
diversity - is nothing less than the pre-eminent fact of
existence.
David Harmon, Executive Director, The George Wright Society;
Co-founder, Terralingua

BIOCULTUR AL DIV ERSIT Y TOOLKIT
Volume 1 - Introduction to Biocultural Diversity
Copyright ©Terralingua 2014
Designed by Ortixia Dilts
Edited by Luisa Maffi and Ortixia Dilts

2 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

O

Table of Contents
Introduction
Biocultural Diversity: the True Web of Life
Biocultural Diversity at a Glance
The Biocultural Heritage of Mexico: a Case Study
The World We Want: Ensuring Our Collective
Bioculturally Resilient Future
For More Information

Image Credits: Cover and photo above © Cristina Mittermeier,2008; Montage left page © Cristina
Mittermeier , 2008 (photos 1, 2), © Anna Maffi, 2008 (photo 3), © Stanford Zent, 2008 (photo 4).

BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 3

BIOCULTURAL DIVERSITY TOOLKIT
VOL. 1. Introduction to Biocultural Diversity

Introduction
Luisa Maffi

I

n the past few decades, people have become familiar
with the idea of biodiversity as the biological variety
of life on earth, at the levels of species, their habitats,
and their genes. We are also increasingly aware of,
and concerned about, the global threats biodiversity
is facing because of human action. More recently, the
concept of “biocultural diversity” has provided a new,
more complex and integrated, perspective on the
diversity of life, as diversity in both nature and culture.
From this perspective, the diversity of societies,
cultures and languages that have developed throughout
human history is another fundamental expression of
life’s evolutionary potential. Cultural diversity is also
profoundly interrelated and interdependent with
biodiversity, through the co-evolutionary processes
by which, over millennia, humans adapted to life in
particular environments. In so doing, human societies
needed to acquire in-depth knowledge of local species,
ecological relationships, and ecosystem functions, and
had to learn how to tailor their cultural practices to suit
their ecological niches. This meant learning how to use
natural resources without depleting them, to preserve
options for the future. Traditional stewardship and
management of natural resources in some cases even
contributed to enhancing local biodiversity.
This cultural knowledge, commonly described as
“traditional environmental knowledge” (TEK), has
been passed on from generation to generation, through
language as well as practical teachings. TEK has shaped
ways of life, worldviews, and sense of place, serving
material as well as psychological and spiritual needs.
Through constant innovation, TEK has remained alive
and vibrant in those societies that have maintained
a close link with and direct dependence on the local
environment, particularly the Indigenous Peoples and
local communities that represent the largest share of
the world’s cultural diversity.
4 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

Environmental degradation poses an especially
severe threat for these place-based societies. It deprives
them of their subsistence base and of the basis for their
individual and social identity. It undermines their
societal structure, organization, and resilience. At the
same time, the social, economic, and political pressures
that Indigenous Peoples and local communities
experience worldwide contribute to hastening
environmental degradation. Such pressures often result
in the displacement of these communities from their
traditional territories, the introduction of alien value
systems and ways of life, and the loss of traditional
knowledge and local languages. Radical changes of
this nature can lead to increasingly unsustainable
relationships with the environment.
Supporting the resilience of Indigenous Peoples and
local communities is therefore both a human rights
imperative and an environmental one. It presents
special challenges as well as opportunities for all those
who work for environmental protection and social
justice. The Indigenous movement has been leading the
effort to link these two realms in the quest for ensuring
their own environmental, social, and cultural rights.
Biocultural diversity research has contributed to
our understanding of the links between biodiversity
and cultural diversity. Global and regional mapping
of the overlapping distribution of these diversities
have pinpointed a number of factors that accounting
for these geographic patterns and for the persistence
or loss of biocultural diversity. Indicators of the state
and trends of linguistic diversity and of TEK can
be correlated with biodiversity indicators to give
us a picture of what is happening with the world’s
biocultural diversity. And hundreds of studies and
applied projects worldwide are refining our knowledge
of the connections between language, culture and the
environment at the local level.

Photo © Anna Maffi, 2008
At the same time, Indigenous and local groups on
all continents have been involved in a multiplicity
of efforts to restore the eco-cultural health of their
landscapes and communities. From protection or
restoration of culturally important species, sacred
natural sites, and community conserved areas, to
conservation or reintroduction of locally adapted seeds
and landraces, to documentation and revitalization
of local languages, oral traditions, and traditional
knowledge, all these efforts are in effect biocultural
in nature, as they intrinsically combine cultural
affirmation with environmental action.
Research, advocacy, and on-the-ground projects
have had a key role in promoting a biocultural
perspective at international as well as national levels.
Familiarity with and interest in the idea of biocultural
diversity are growing. Time is ripe, then, for bringing
together a number of resources developed over the
last several years by Terralingua and others working

in the field of biocultural diversity. Terralingua’s
Biocultural Diversity Toolkit is meant to make such
resources available in a user-friendly format to those
who are interested in learning more about the concept
and its practice, as well as about some of the tools and
approaches that can assist local and global efforts to
sustain and strengthen the biocultural web of life.
Modified from: Maffi, L. Talking diversity. World Conservation:
The magazine of the World Conservation Union, January 2008:
13-14.

a
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 5

Languages and traditional knowledge have evolved over time through people's adaptation to the environment.

Biocultural Diversity: The True
Luisa Maffi
6 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

The “true” web of life is biocultural diversity:
the interlinked diversity of life in nature
and culture, an integrated whole formed by
biodiversity, cultural diversity, and linguistic
diversity. Diversity in this fuller sense is
the multi-faceted expression of the creative
force and potential of life in both nature and
culture, a wellspring of vitality and resilience
for life on the planet.
What Is Biocultural Diversity?

F

or many people, the idea of the “web of life” conjures
up images of diversity in the natural world: that is,
biodiversity, the millions of species of plants and animals
that have evolved on Earth, interconnected with one
another and with the ecosystems in which they live. Often,
people don’t think of humans as a part of this network of
interdependence—as if we were distinct and separate from
the natural world, and even meant to be dominant over it.

Photo © Cristina Mittermeier 2008

Web of Li fe

But over the past t wo decades a more holistic
understanding has begun to emerge, reminding us that
humans are part of, not apart from, nature. As a species, we
have coevolved with the natural environment and adapted
to it, while drawing material and spiritual sustenance from
it. Through close interaction with one another and with
the local environment, we have developed thousands of
different cultures and languages—a myriad distinctive ways
of seeing, knowing, doing, and speaking. For millennia, local
cultures and languages have been intimately, some would
say inextricably, linked with the local landscapes in which
human communities have lived and developed one generation
after the next. And this is not just a story of the past. On the
contrary, even today we continue to be totally dependent on
nature for our survival and well-being.
In this new understanding, the “true” web of life is
biocultural diversity: the interlinked diversity of life in nature
and culture, an integrated whole formed by biodiversity,
cultural diversity, and linguistic diversity. Diversity in this
fuller sense is the multi-faceted expression of the creative force
and potential of life in both nature and culture, a wellspring of
vitality and resilience for life on the planet. Human societies
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 7

depend on biodiversity and the functions of ecosystems
to sustain themselves and thrive. In turn, biodiversity
and ecosystems depend on human stewardship to
maintain their vitality and resilience, and to make all
life—including human life—possible.
We need biocultural diversity for the continuity
of life on earth. It is a precious gift that should be
cherished, nurtured, and protected. But we are not
doing that. Instead, the world over, we are squandering
this invaluable and irreplaceable gift. Global economic,
political, and social forces are rapidly eroding the
health of the world’s ecosystems and cultures, and
silencing the voices of the world’s languages. The
fabric of life in nature and culture is coming unraveled,
leaving our biocultural world ever more fragile and the
outlook for humans and all other species increasingly
uncertain.
We are witnessing a “converging extinction
crisis” of diversity in nature and culture—and it is
a crisis entirely of our making. We have become so
disconnected from the natural world, that we are
destroying the conditions for life—as if life itself were
expendable. And at the same time, we are suppressing
other lifeways that could teach us lessons about more
sustainable living. We may delude ourselves that our
technologies will always come to the rescue; but the
reality is that, in the end, nobody on the planet is
immune from the fraying of the biocultural web of life.
That means that the effort to protect, restore, and
sustain the diversity of life in nature and culture is
a cause we all do and must share, no matter who we
are and where and how we live. This effort requires a
profound shift in values, to make biocultural diversity
a fundamental societal goal. This may sound like
a tall order, but it is entirely possible, as our values
are entirely of our own making—and history tells us
that human societies have shifted their values many
times before. Yet, in the world today powerful forces
continue to push us in the opposite, unsustainable
direction. What we need to turn the tide is meaningful
education—not just information, but education of the
kind that deepens knowledge and transforms minds
and hearts. We cannot care for biocultural diversity
unless we intimately understand its importance and
value for ourselves and for all of life. Only once we
achieve that understanding, can we be better prepared
to take action.
8 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

The Three Manifestations
of Biocultural Diversity

B

iocultural diversit y is a complex concept.
It describes a system of interrelated and
interdependent diversities: biological, cultural, and
linguistic. To understand the concept, it may be useful
to first break it down into its three components.

Biological diversity—or biodiversity—is the aspect
of biocultural diversity that people are generally more
familiar with. Biodiversity is the total variety of living
organisms found in a given ecosystem, biome, or the
whole biosphere. It can be measured in a number of
ways: at the level of species, of their habitats, and of
their genes. Species richness (the number of species
in a given area or globally) is the most commonly
used measure of biodiversity. Because most species
have not yet been identified and classified, estimates
of the number of species on earth have varied greatly.
Recent estimates suggest that there may be as many
as 8.7 million species of animals, plants, fungi, and
protists (single-celled organisms) in the world today
(plus perhaps 10,000 species of bacteria and archaea),
of which only slightly over 1.2 million have been
catalogued.
Cultural diversity is the variety of human cultures,
that is, the variety of worldviews, lifeways, knowledge
and value systems, practices and forms of expression
displayed by different human societies. Some have
suggested that the total diversity of the world’s cultures
forms an “ethnosphere” – a global web of human
cultures. How many different cultures there are in
the world is difficult to quantify, because cultural
boundaries are permeable, and many cultural traits
overlap across multiple social groups. Due to these
complexities, commonly the number of different
languages is used as a proxy for the diversity of
cultures. This is because language is a fundamental
marker of cultural identity and the main tool for the
transmission of culture.
Linguistic diversity is the variety of human
languages spoken in a given region, or in the world as a
whole. While linguists sometimes disagree as to what is
a language and what is a dialect, the general consensus
is that there are about 6-7,000 living languages in the

Map 1. Endemism in languages and higher vertabrates: Comparison of the top 25 countries.
Source: Harmon (2002).
world. It is estimated that most of these languages
(80% to 85%) are spoken by indigenous peoples. The
diversity of the world’s languages forms yet another
global web, which some have called a “logosphere”.

Interlinkages

L

anguage, culture, and the environment are
interrelated. Since the dawn of human history,
everywhere on earth people have interacted closely
with the natural environment as the source of all
sustenance: the source of air, water, food, medicine,
clothing, shelter, and all other material needs, as well
as of physical, psychological, and spiritual well-being.
Through this vital dependence on the environment,
over time human societies have developed detailed
local knowledge about plants, animals, and ecological
processes, as well as specific cultural values and
practices about human relationships with nature. This
diversity of local knowledge, values, and practices is

expressed and transmitted through the thousands of
different languages spoken on our planet.
This is how language, culture, and the environment
are inextricably interrelated. In each place, the local
environment sustains people; in turn, people sustain
the local environment through the traditional
knowledge, values, and practices embedded in their
cultures and their languages.
This interrelationship is still especially apparent in
indigenous and local communities that maintain close
material and spiritual ties with their environments.
Traditional ecological knowledge and practices,
accumulated over generations, often make indigenous
peoples and local communities highly skilled and
respectful stewards of the ecosystems in which they
live. Indigenous and local languages store and transmit
this knowledge and the related social behaviors,
practices, and innovations.
The local interdependence of language, culture, and
the environment translates into strong correlations
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 9

between linguistic diversity, cultural diversity and
biodiversity at the global level. Again taking linguistic
diversity as a proxy for cultural diversity, maps that
overlay the geographic distribution of biodiversity
and linguistic diversity worldwide show a significant
overlap between the two (see Maps 1-3). In other words,
areas of high biodiversity also abound in linguistic
diversity. Wherever one finds richness in biodiversity,
one can also expect to find a great number of distinct
languages (and, by implication, a great number of
distinct cultures).

numbers of mother-tongue speakers of each of the
world’s languages. That is to say that more and more
people are switching from the many small languages
to the few dominant ones, and that more and more
of the small languages are not being transmitted to
the younger generations. And this trend in the loss of
global linguistic diversity closely mirrors trends in the
loss of global biodiversity for the same period of time.
This strongly suggests that what happens with diversity
in nature goes hand in hand with what happens with
diversity in culture.

In this sense, just as people are not separate from
nature, so too the global biosphere is not separate
from the global network of languages and cultures that
envelop the globe. This is why the “true” web of life is
a biocultural web of life.

Furthermore, because knowledge, including
traditional environmental knowledge (TEK), is encoded
in languages, the erosion of linguistic diversity also
precipitates the erosion of knowledge, through the
breakdown of intergenerational transmission. Research
has helped identify various factors that account for the
loss of TEK, such as language shift, formal education,
habitat degradation, human displacement, and so forth.

What Is Happening with
Biocultural Diversity?

M

any people are aware that the planet is in the
midst of a crisis of biodiversity loss. Biologists
argue that we are in the midst of the 6th mass
extinction of life on earth—the previous one being
the episode that led to the extinction of dinosaurs,
about 65 million years ago. But the current extinction
crisis is the first one to be entirely of our own making.
It is due not to natural causes, but to the mounting
pressures from human activities that are disabling the
world’s ecosystems and bringing about the demise of
thousands and thousands of species.
But this is not all. There is another mass extinction
going on at the same time—an extinction of human
languages and cultures. For the past several decades,
linguists and anthropologists have been raising
concern about the rapid loss of linguistic and cultural
diversity brought about by the spread of a global
monoculture and of dominant languages like English,
Spanish, Portuguese, Chinese, Hindi and Russian.

These are not two separate extinction crises, but
rather, they represent a “converging extinction crisis”
of the diversity of life in all its forms—a biocultural
diversity extinction crisis. Research shows that since
1970 there has been a 20% decline in global linguistic
diversity, as measured in terms of changes in the
10 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

So at one and the same time we are rapidly losing
both our critical life-support systems, and the vast
pool of human knowledge and languages that carry
invaluable lessons for sustainable living on earth.
As traditional cultures and languages decline and
natural environments become degraded, our collective
“survival kit” is becoming depleted.

Why Is It Happening?

A

s with biological species, human languages and
cultures are not static. They naturally change
and evolve over time. All human cultures are capable
of adapting to new circumstances and of creating
solutions to new problems. And all human languages
are capable of developing to accommodate new
communication needs.

However, as with biological species, human
languages and cultures require time to change and
evolve organically. Under normal conditions, this
process happens slowly, from one generation to the
next, as people find new ways of responding to new
challenges and opportunities, and new ways of talking
about changing circumstances.
But in the world today, change is no longer taking
place in this organic way. The pace and scale of change

Map 2. Plant Diversity vs. Language Diversity. Source: Stepp et al (2004) for Terralingua.

11

Over half the world’s population speaks only one or another of 25 languages. The rest of the
population is divided between the estimated remaining 6975 languages. Source: Terralingua’s Index
of Linguistic Diversity. Original work by David Harmon and Jonathan Loh, based on Harmon and
Loh (2010).
have grown exponentially, and so has the intensity of
the pressures that global economic, political, and social
forces are placing on the biocultural web of life. These
forces, and the changes they are imposing all over
the world, are far outpacing the intrinsic capacity of
natural and cultural systems to adapt. By promoting
a dominant way of life that is entirely unsustainable,
these forces are eroding the vitality and resilience of
the world’s diverse ecosystems, languages, and cultures.
Sweeping global change is dispossessing indigenous
peoples and local communities of their lands, resources,
and lifestyles. This is causing them to subsist in highly
degraded environments, while destroying or weakening
their cultural traditions, and promoting or forcing the
abandonment of their ancestral languages.

12 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

Losing one’s linguistic and cultural identity means
losing essential elements in people’s connections
with one another and with the natural world. The
consequences are profound for both the well-being
of people and the health of the environment. Forcing
cultural and linguistic shift on indigenous peoples and
local communities not only violates their human rights,
it also seriously undermines the goal of protecting the
natural environment for the benefit of humans and all
other species.
“Monocultures of the mind” have the same end
result as monocultures in nature. They make our
planet more fragile and vulnerable to both natural
disasters and human-made crises. But the dominant
ideology today ignores this reality, and seeks easy-tocontrol uniformity instead of organic unity in diversity.

Map. 3. Core Areas of Biocultural Diversity as Identified by Terralingua’s Index of Biocultural Diversity. Source: Original work by
David Harmon and Jonathan Loh, based on Loh and Harmon (2005).

BCD PRIMER | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 13

Why Does It Matter?
There are many vital reasons why we should care:
First, we are losing the unique ways of life,
languages, and identities of the world’s diverse peoples.
This is a matter of human rights. For each one of
these peoples, it is their fundamental right to choose
their own path for development while maintaining
continuity with their own past. As the 1992 Kari Oka
Declaration of the world’s indigenous peoples put it, it
is their right to “walk toward the future in the footsteps
of their ancestors”.
For humanity at large, the loss of cultural and
linguistic diversity represents a drastic reduction of our
collective human heritage, a profound diminishment of
our understanding of what it means to be human. Our
horizon as a species becomes all the narrower for that.
Second, we are losing both the rich biodiversity
that supports humanity and all other species, and the
wealth of traditional knowledge that helps sustain
biodiversity. It is a matter of survival. Yet, more than
half of humanity now lives in urban environments,
largely cut off from direct contact with the natural
environment and from awareness of our continued,
inescapable interdependence with it. Some talk of
this as the “extinction of experience” of the natural
environment. Others suggest that many city dwellers,
and especially children, are suffering from “nature
deficit disorder”.
In this time of crisis, we need to be reminded that
we have become disconnected from and out of balance
with the natural environment. We need to be reminded
that there are other ways of being human that are more
harmonious with nature. We need to hear all the voices
of the earth and the ancestral wisdom that they express
about living sustainably on this planet.
This diversity of solutions itself offers the most
poignant lesson to be learned from a biocultural
perspective. Cultural diversity is not a matter of
superficial, if esthetically pleasing, exotic f lavours;
rather, it is the deep reflection of human creativity
and inventiveness put to the service of enduring issues
of adapation and, increasingly, of pressing issues
of planetary survival. Losing biocultural diversity
14 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

means weakening the whole fabric of life—the web of
interdependence that is absolutely vital to our common
future. It means losing our options for life on earth. It
is like losing our life insurance when we need it the
most.

Taking Action

F

or that reason, it should be self-evident that the
best way to “conserve” the diversity of life on Earth
is to ensure that it does not get depleted in the first
place, and that cultures, languages, and ecosystems can
continue to thrive and be vital and resilient. Our best
hopes for the future reside in peacefully, equitably, and
respectfully sharing a world of difference in nature and
culture, for the benefit of all humans and all of life.

Yet, so much damage has been done already to
the biocultural web of life, that all too often we find
ourselves confronted with eleventh hour salvage efforts
to rescue whatever pieces are left of this invaluable
fabric that evolution has woven around the globe. All
too often, it is too late. Once certain biological and
social thresholds are crossed, no amount of technology
or social engineering can bring back what is lost. As
the web of life continues to fray, there is no telling
when we may be crossing a global threshold for the
continuity of life as we know it.
We must reverse this dangerous trend. And indeed,
all over the world, thousands and thousands of people
are working to make this happen. From indigenous
peoples and local communities striving to safeguard
their lands, languages, and ways of life, to the many
committed others who are devoted to the cause at
local, regional, and global levels, there is a growing
movement underway to stop and reverse biocultural
diversity loss. These efforts focus on preventing further
damage, so that the ailing web of life can heal and
regenerate.
Some of these efforts concentrate on reviving and
revitalizing local languages and cultural identities,
others on bolstering traditional environmental
knowledge and practices, others still on rekindling

Little Fish Lake, in the Chilcotin region of British Columbia, Canada. The Tsilhqot’in First Nation in the area
is concerned about the likely impacts of a proposed mining project on the lake, which continues to be used
traditionally by the people. Photo © Luisa Maffi 2012
place-based belief and value systems and strengthening
traditional institutions of governance, land tenure,
and resource management that enable socially and
ecologically sustainable living. The volumes in
this Toolkit are meant to exemplify this variety of
approaches and some of the initiatives that are being
undertaken the world over.
Crucial to all these endeavors is intergenerational
continuity, the continued transmission of languages,
traditional knowledge, cultural values and practices,
and institutions. Cultures and languages are not static,
they are dynamic systems that are constantly changing
and innovating to adapt to new situations. But when
cultural and linguistic change is not forced, it happens

along with continuity--continuity of identity, and
continuity of connectedness of people to people and
people to place. It is this dynamic interplay of change
and continuity that confers resilience to both humans
and the rest of the natural world. It is not surprising,
then, that some of the best biocultural conservation
efforts being made today highlight the vital importance
of intergenerational transmission, and of ensuring that
the link across generations is maintained or restored.
Many of these efforts are entirely endogenous—
generated and conducted from within indigenous and
local communities that have taken action in their own
hands. Many, too, are the fruit of mutually respectful
collaborative partnerships with outsiders. Both kinds
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 15

of efforts must be encouraged and supported, and so must sincere dialogue and two-way, mutual learning
across linguistic and cultural boundaries, different knowledge systems, and diverse worldviews. Ultimately,
it is from this multiplicity of on-the-ground actions and interactions that a new awareness is arising. And
it is from this new awareness that the shift in values we need to make biocultural diversity a fundamental
societal goal will ultimately emerge.

s
REFERENCES
Borrini-Feyerabend, G., MacDonald, K., and Maffi, L. (eds.) 2004. History, Culture, and Conservation. Policy Matters 13. Special
issue.
Carlson, T. and Maffi, L. (eds.) 2004. Ethnobotany and Conservation of Biocultural Diversity. Advances in Economic Botany Series
Vol. 15. Bronx, N.Y.: New York Botanical Garden Press.
Harmon, D. 2002. In Light of Our Differences: How Diversity in Nature and Culture Makes Us Human. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
Institution Press.
Harmon, D. and Loh, J. 2010. The Index of Linguistic Diversity: A New Quantitative Measure of Trends in the Status of the World’s
Languages. Language Documentation and Conservation 4: 97-151.
Loh, J. and Harmon, D. 2005. A Global Index of Biocultural Diversity. Ecological Indicators 5: 231-241.
Maffi, L. 1998. Language: A Resource for Nature. Nature and Resources: The UNESCO Journal on the Environment and Natural
Resources Research 34(4): 12-21.
Maffi, L. (ed.) 2001. On Biocultural Diversity: Linking Language, Knowledge, and the Environment. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
Institution Press.
Maffi, L. 2005. Linguistic, cultural, and biological diversity. Annual Review of Anthropology 34: 599-617.
Maffi, L. 2007. Biocultural diversity and sustainability. In: Sage Handbook on Environment and Society, J. Pretty, A. Ball, T. Benton,
J. Guivant, D. Lee, D. Orr, M. Pfeffer and H. Ward (eds.). Pp. 267-277. London: Sage Publications.
Maffi, L. and Woodley, E. 2007. Culture. In: Chapter 5, Biodiversity, Global Environment Outlook: Environment for Development
(GEO 4) Report. Pp. 182-185. Nairobi: UNEP.
Maffi, L. and Woodley, E. 2010. Biocultural Diversity Conservation: A Global Sourcebook. London and Washington, DC: Earthscan.
Maffi, L. Skutnabb-Kangas, T.. and Andrianarivo, J. 1999. Linguistic Diversity. In: Cultural and Spiritual Values of Biodiversity, D.
Posey (ed.). Pp. 21-57. London/Nairobi: Intermediate Technology Publications and UN Environment Programme.
Oviedo, G. Maffi, L., and Larsen, P.B. 2000. Indigenous and Traditional Peoples of the World and Ecoregion Conservation: An
Integrated Approach to Conserving the World’s Biological and Cultural Diversity, and companion map Indigenous and Traditional
Peoples and the Global 200 Ecoregions. Gland, Switzerland: WWF-International and Terralingua.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T., Maffi, L., and Harmon, D. 2003. Sharing a World of Difference: The Earth’s Linguistic, Cultural, and Biological
Diversity, and companion map The World’s Biocultural Diversity: People, Languages, and Ecosystems. Paris: UNESCO.
Stepp, J.R. et al 2004. Development of a GIS for global biocultural diversity. In: Borrini Feyerabend, G., MacDonald, K. and Maffi,
L. (eds.) 2004. History, Culture and Conservation. Policy Matters 13.Special issue. Pp. 267–270.

16 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

Biocultural Diversity
at a Glance
Text: Luisa Maffi
Design: Jen Hegarty, Ortixia Dilts

What is Biocultural Diversity?
Biocultural Diversity comprises
the diversity of life in all of its
manifestations – biological, cultural,
and linguistic.
The diversity of life is made up
not only of the diversity of plants
and animal species, habitats and
ecosystems found on the planet, but
also of the diversity of human cultures
and languages.

Biological

Cultural

Linguistic

BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 17

The Three Manifestations of Diversity
These three manifestations of
the diversity of life do not exist
in separate and parallel realms.
Rather, they are interrelated
and interdependent, as different
aspects of a single, complex socioecological adaptive system.

Biological
Diversity

Linguistic
Diversity

Cultural
Diversity

Biological Diversity
Biological diversity – or biodiversity – is the
biological variety of life on earth: animals,
plants, their habitats, and their genes. It
comprises the total variety of ecosystems
and living organisms found in a given region
or in the whole biosphere.
Biodiversity is a complex phenomenon
with many interrelated dimensions. Species
richness (the number of species in a given
area or globally) is often used to provide a
simple measure of biodiversity.

(Photo iStockphoto)

There may be as many as 8.7 million species of animals, plants, fungi, and
single-celled organisms in the world today.
18 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

Cultural Diversity
Cultural diversity is the variety of
human cultures found in a specific
region, or in the world as a whole.
There are several thousand different
cultures in the world today.
The total diversity of the world’s
cult ural systems for ms an
“ethnosphere” – a global web
of human cultures that is deeply
interlinked with the biosphere.
Humans are part of nature, not separate from and dominant over it. Human societies
depend on biodiversity and the functions of ecosystems to sustain themselves and
thrive. In turn, biodiversity and ecosystems depend on human stewardship to maintain
their vitality and resilience, and to make all life – including human life – possible.
(Photo © C. Mittermeier 2010)

Linguistic Diversity
Linguistic diversity is the variety of human
languages spoken in a specific region, or in
the world as a whole. There are about 6-7,000
different languages in the world today, forming a
global web of languages, or “logosphere”.
Language and culture are interlinked. Language
is the main tool for the transmission of culture. It
is also a fundamental marker of cultural identity.
In turn, language and culture are intimately linked
to the environment. Each language expresses
the specific cultural world view, values, beliefs,
and knowledge of its speakers – including vital
knowledge about the environment and about
human relationships with nature.

AW
L A ORL
NG D
U A OF
GE
S

(Image: M. Aguila and D. Dilts 2011 ©Terralingua)

19

Understanding the Connections
To understand the connections between
biological, cultural, and linguistic
diversity, we first need to think of how
people in different cultures around the
world interact with nature.
Each human society derives all the
material and non-material necessities
for life from the local environment. In
so doing, each society develops specific
cultural knowledge and practices
about the environment. This cultural
knowledge and practices are reflected in
and communicated through language.

(Photo: © S. Zent, 2010)

Understanding the Connections –

cont’d.

At the global level, the links
between language, culture,
and the environment become
apparent in the overlap in the
distribution of biodiversity
(here represented by plant
diversity) and cultural diversity
(here represented by linguistic
diversity).
(Source: Stepp et al 2004 for Terralingua)

20 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

The Biocultural Diversity Extinction Crisis
Biologists agree that we have entered the
sixth mass extinction of biodiversity—
the first one to be entirely caused by
human activities. Each year, hundreds of
thousands of species may be lost globally.
Extinction rates are estimated to be 1,00010,000 times higher than background
extinction rates.
But we are also causing an extinction
crisis of cultural and linguistic diversity.
An ever growing number of cultures
and languages worldwide are at risk of
disappearing because of pressures from
dominant cultures and languages.

(Photo: © 2010 Yasuyuki Morimoto)

Hope for the Future
Humanity is at a crossroads. There is no doubt
that our choices and actions today are having
profound consequences for present and future
generations. But here is hope for the future.
We have been the cause of the problem, but
we also can and must be part of the solution.
By realigning our values and behaviors to be
in harmony with nature and to respect and
protect biocultural diversity, we can stem the
crisis and set out on a more sustainable course.
(Photo: © 2010 Samantha Ross)

BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 21

The Biocultural Heritage of Mexico: A Case Study
Víctor M. Toledo, Eckart Boege and Narciso Barrera-Bassols

Introduction

S

tudies from different disciplinary backgrounds are revealing the inextricable links between
cultural, biological and agricultural diversity at global, national, regional and local scales (Maffi,
2005). These multidimensional and complex relations are named ‘biocultural diversity’. In some way,
these links represent the (biocultural) memory of the human species, because they are the presentday expression of a long historical legacy of interrelations between humans and nature (Toledo and
Barrera-Bassols, 2008). At the country level, the conjunction of these three dimensions represents
the nation’s biocultural heritage, and it is revealed through the geographical analysis of wild plant
and animal species, languages, domesticated organisms, and especially territories of indigenous
and local peoples.
In this essay, we offer an overview of the biocultural heritage of Mexico, through the discussion
of three main topics: (i) a brief description of biological, linguistic and agricultural diversities; (ii)
the definition, identification and mapping of biocultural hotspots in the Mexican territory; and (iii) a
rapid review of the main grassroots initiatives and projects engaged in the multiple defense of biotic
resources, germplasm, language, cultural identity, local livelihoods and territory. Our national-scale
review synthesizes decades of work carried out by Mexican researchers and foreign colleagues about
the main components of biocultural richness of Mexico.

Mexico: The Third Biocultural Center of the World

T

he complex connections between dimensions of linguistic, biological, and agricultural diversity
become evident when they are analyzed at a global scale. Such correlations reveal that, in
general, the majority of languages and of plant and animal species are situated in countries that
are located along the fringes of the tropics (Oviedo, Maffin and Larsen, 2000). The principal centers
of domestic plant and animal dispersion are located in these countries, in addition to a majority of
cultural centers and/or a majority of the birthplaces of civilizations (Toledo and Barrera-Bassols,
2008).
Mexico, a megadiverse (the country alone contains 10% of the biological diversity found on the
planet) and megacultural country (11 linguistic families, 68 language groupings, and 364 language
variants according to INALI, 2007) has provided a historical linkage of these two worlds through
the generation of one of the most important and singular civilization poles of humanity: the
Mesoamerican Civilization.

22 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

AGRO-DIVERSITY
(centres of domestication)

BIO-DIVERSITY
(number of species)

ETHNO-DIVERSITY
(number of languages)

BIODIVERSITY

ETHNICITY

CENTRE OF DOMESTICATION

INDONESIA

2

2

South east Asia

INDIA

10

4

Birmania

MEXICO

5

5

Mesoamerica

AUSTRALIA

4

7

Non

BRAZIL

1

10

Non

CHINA

8

9

North of China

Figure 1 . The six top countries in terms of biocultural richness. Numbers indicate the ranking
position of countries in biological and language diversity.
As a consequence, Mesoamerican peoples
domesticated 15% of the plant species that make
up the world’s food system (CONABIO, 2008).
This feat of civilization was achieved through the
manipulation of plant populations, landscapes
and productive systems, and through the multiple
uses of natural resources. This savoir-faire about
nature, largely perfected during almost 9,000
years, constitutes without doubt the bulk of the
biocultural patrimony that exists in Mexico. As
mentioned above, from a biocultural perspective
Mexico occupies third place on a world scale, just
after Indonesia and India, and just before Australia,
Brazil, and China (Figure 1).

1. Biological diversity
Due to its geographic location, its geological
history, and its heterogeneous topography,
Mexico represents an exceptional setting for
the multiplication of species. The confluence of

Neartic and Neotropical vegetation lineages that
occurs in the mountain ranges offers a complex
network of biogeographical locations in the form
of a mosaic, which gives place to innumerable
niches that are relatively small in size. This
landscape heterogeneity, a product of natural
history, results in an incredible biological richness.
Mexico occupies the third place in the world in the
number of vascular plant species and endemics,
and the fourth place in the richness of vertebrate
species and endemics (mammals, birds, reptiles,
and amphibians). Overall, the plant and animal
diversity that occurs in Mexico places the country
as the fifth most megadiverse county in the world,
containing approximately 10% of the biological
diversity worldwide (CONABIO, 2008).

2. Linguistic diversity
Much of the current Mexican territory is the
site of one of two main centers of civilization
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 23

Figure 2. Geographical location of 22 biocultural regions in the Mexican territory. For details see Boege, 2008.

24 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

that developed on the American continent over more that 10
thousands years. In its cultural importance and complexity,
this center of civilization resembles those that originated in
China, India, Mesopotamia, the Andes, and Egypt. The diverse
peoples that coexisted on this territory shared a common
base in terms of their worldviews, knowledge, and production
methods. Today, this legacy of civilization is represented by the
existence of more than 300 living languages, most of which are
endemic and are spoken by a population estimated between 7
and 10 million people. The significance of this richness places
Mexico as the fifth most linguistically megadiverse country in
the world (www.ethnologue.org).

3. Agricultural diversity
Another substantive feature of biocultural diversity in
Mexico is that it constitutes one of the 12 Vavilov centers, or
centers of origin of the domestication and diversification
of plants in the world. This Mesoamerican effort of plant
domestication comprises 15% of the crops that are currently
consumed in the world. Such effort is fundamentally based
in the domestication of maize, an emblematic icon of
Mesoamerica, accompanied by another 110 species that include
the tomato, chocolate, vanilla, bean, squash, and chile pepper.
This region also excels in adaptation to the heterogeneity of
the landscape through the design and implementation of the
multi-cropped milpa system. The milpa is an agricultural field
characterized by the planting of a triad of crops, maize-beansquash, which on occasion is accompanied by up to ten to
twenty associated species.

The Biocultural Hotspots

T

he definition, location, and delimitation of biocultural
centers or hotspots in space is achieved utilizing scientific
information, statistics, and cartography of biological, linguistic,
and agricultural diversity, and their correlation with indigenous
territories. In Mexico, 22 biocultural centers are recognized
(Figure 2). They are the result of a “core nucleus” of indigenous
territories totaling at least 28 million hectares in size with 6.79
million indigenous habitants, making up 14% of the national
territory. Inside and out of this nucleus another 3.31 million
habitants who speak an indigenous language live in 27,712
localities (Boege 2008). The importance of these biocultural
hotspots is emphasized by the five following situations:
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 25

71

DECIDOUS LOWER FOREST
TROPICAL RAINFOREST
SEMI-EVERGREEN SEASONAL FOREST

62
60
56

VEGETATION OF PETÉN
51

TROPICAL MONTANE CLOUD FOREST
44

SEMI-EVERGREEN LOWER FOREST
33

INDUCED PALMAR
27

SEMI-EVERGREEN THORN FOREST

25

SEMI-EVERGREEN TROPICAL RAINFOREST
FOREST OF PINE

24
23

FOREST OF PINE-OAK
19

SAVANNA GRASSLAND
FOREST OF OAK-PINE

18
15

FOREST OF MEXICAN WHITE PINE

14

PASTURE LAND

13

SAVANNA
SEMI-DECIDUOUS SEASONAL FOREST

12
10

DECIDUOUS SEASONAL FOREST
FOREST OF OAK

10

MOUNTAIN CEDAR

10
9

MANGROVE
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Figure 3. Percentage of the remaining primary vegetation of Mexico located within indigenous territories.
After Boege, 2008.

1. Water capture.
Approximately 23%, or about a quarter, of
all water captured nationally is collected in
biocultural hotspots. The majority of the water
is collected in basin watersheds that are directly
impacted by atmospheric events such as hurricanes,
north winds, and cyclones. These areas act as a sort
of sponge that captures water, and for this reason
they provide highly valued ecosystem services.

2. Biodiversity.
In Mexico, the majority of the ejidos (new
peasant settlements resulting from the Agrarian
Reform of 1917) and comunidades (some 35,000
in total), which make up the core of peasant and
indigenous territories, is localized in the ten states
of the Mexican Republic considered as the richest
in biological terms (these states include Oaxaca,
26 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

Chiapas, Veracruz, Guerrero, and Michoacán
among others). Approximately 70% of indigenous
territories is under some sort of priority for the
conservation of its rich biological resources,
including centers of natural origin and high
agrodiversity areas.

3. Remaining vegetation.
Essentially all types of vegetation present at a
national level are encountered in these centers
(Figure 3). Most importantly, the biocultural
centers maintain 76% of tropical deciduous forests,
70% of tropical rain forests, 63.5% of tropical semideciduous forests, 54% of temperate mixed forests,
and 30% of pine and/or oak forests that remain
in the country. For the remaining vegetation that
occurs within indigenous territories, it is estimated
that there are 15,000 species of plants, half of the
entire flora of Mexico (Boege, 2008).

5. Maize diversity.

Figure 4. Five main modes of producing coffee: (a)
rustic; (b) traditional polyculture; (c) commercial
polyculture; (d) shaded monoculture; and (e) sunny
monoculture. The figure shows the real heights of
trees in meters. After Moguel and Toledo, 1999.

4. Natural protected areas.
Of the total 152 protected natural areas at
a federal level that exist in Mexico, 52 have
indigenous populations living within them. These
protected areas have a surface area of 5.57 million
hectares, where 1.46 million hectares overlap
with indigenous territory. If this surface area is
added to the areas protected at the state level that
coincide with indigenous territories, a total of
more than 2 million hectares that are protected by
law can be found in indigenous territories (Boege,
2008).

The history of the domestication of maize,
squash, beans, chile peppers and another 110
Mesoamerican crops in Mexico is indissolubly
connected with the cultural development of
indigenous peoples that have farmed in this region
for more than 9 thousand years. Out of all of these
crops, maize is the most emblematic. Because of
this, it is essentially unknown whether humans
domesticated maize or maize domesticated
humans. Since Mexico is the center of origin and
diversification of maize, the bulk of its genetic
bank at the global level is located in Mexico. This
reserve is distributed in situ across the country
at altitudes that range from sea level to 3,400
m.a.s.l. Under conditions of incredible landscape
variety, up to 60 races of maize are cultivated
(Ortega-Paczka, 2003) and hundreds or perhaps
thousands of local varieties of native maize are
adapted to micro-specific ecological conditions.
Such adaptations are also a response to cultural,
food, ritual, and commercial necessities (Perales
et al, 2005). The consumption of native maize
is the quintessential staple of Mexican diet
and gastronomy, where the largest part of this
consumption occurs in indigenous territories.

Biocultural Resistances:
Grassroots Projects
1. Community-based conservation
Within a context of high social presence in the
agrarian system, community-based conservation
has been a growing process. In Mexico, local
participation in biological conservation has been
facilitated by legislation and several government
programs. The main program has been the Project
for Biodiversity Conservation by Indigenous
Communities (COINBIO in Spanish), which
developed actions in villages of three states:
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 27

Figure 5. Geographic distribution of: (i) maize landraces of Mexico, (ii) recorded sites with presence of
transgenic maize (black dots), and (iii) grassroots movements of peasant and indigenous peoples against the
genetic contamination of maize (arrows). For details see Barrera-Bassols, et al 2009.

28 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

Oaxaca, Guerrero and Michoacán. As a result, only
in Oaxaca there are 16 community-based reserves,
which give protection to over 45,000 hectares.
By 2007 the National Commission on Natural
Protected Areas (CONANP) accepted and certified
around 170,000 hectares as locally conserved areas
(Boege, 2008). More recently, in Quintana Roo 49
Mayan ejidos have spontaneously promulgated
and established areas of tropical forests for
conservation, offering protection for water bodies
and archeological sites, and linking these initiatives
to projects of ecotourism (Elizondo and LópezMerlín, 2009).

2. Shaded coffee agroforestry systems
Coffee landscapes are man-made landscapes
resulting from a complex set of environmental and
social processes. In Mexico, there are five main
modes of producing coffee (Figure 4): (i) the two
shade-grown coffee systems established under a
multilayered and multispecies canopy of native
trees that generally are creations of indigenous,
small-scale growers (rustic polyculture and
traditional polyculture); (ii) two coffee systems
established under planted trees that correspond
to either small- and medium-scale farmers or
large-scale owners who are highly involved in the
production of specialized cash crops (commercial
polyculture and commercial monoculture); and
(iii) the sunny coffee system, a monoculture which
utilizes chemical fertilizers and pesticides and
generally is grown by major landowners. Each of
these five types of coffee systems reflects specific
combinations of biological, ecological, cultural,
agrarian, and social factors (Moguel & Toledo 1996,
1999). The two traditional shaded coffee agroforests,
but especially the traditional polyculture, also
called coffee garden, represent an advanced
stage of human manipulation of the native forest
architecture and composition. They represent a sort
of humanized natural forest, which can function as
an important refuge for biodiversity (principally
birds, mammals, flowering plants, and insects).
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 29

Don Ausencio is an organic coffee grower. His coffee is 100% shade grown, pesticide free and
fertilized with natural compost. La Sepultra, Chiapas, Mexico. Photo © Cristina Mittermeier, 2010
In the last two decades, a growing movement
of cultural resistance has made Mexico the first
producer of certified organic coffee in the world.
It is estimated that almost 300,000 hectares are
dedicated to growing traditional coffee gardens.
Today there are 350,000 small-scale coffee
growers in Mexico, mainly in the states of Chiapas,
Veracruz, Puebla, Guerrero and Oaxaca. These
growers produce 40 percent of the total national
coffee production, and almost all of the organic
shaded coffee. In the state of Chiapas, for instance,
107,000 coffee growers, two-thirds of whom belong
to indigenous communities, and many of whom
produce certified organic coffee through over
100 local and regional cooperatives, are strategic
social actors for any biological conservation project
(Toledo, 2003).
30 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

Struggles for the Preservation
of Native Maize

T

he genetic contamination of native maize
that has been discovered in indigenous
territories and peasant communities of Mexico
during the last decade, and the imminent arrival
of genetically modified maize to Mexican parcels,
have caused an uprising of unusual resistance
all over the country (Barrera-Bassols et al, 2009)
(Figure 5). Such movement at a national scale has
been nurtured by urban, peasant, and indigenous
claims synthesized in the slogan “without maize
there is no country” (“sin maiz no hay pais”).
Within the framework of this social struggle, an
ensemble of local actions, undertaken by a diverse

Such movement at a national scale has been nurtured by urban,
peasant, and indigenous claims synthesized in the slogan
“without maize there is no country” (“sin maiz no hay pais”)
array of indigenous and peasant communities and
adapted to their own cultural and environmental
contexts, has led to the elaboration of political
discourse and practices in which maize appears as
an emblematic icon in their claims, which express:
(a) rejection of agricultural technologies such as
transgenic biotechnology; (b) opposition to the
local effects of the global market; (c) disapproval of
the health effects caused by both; and (d) a defense
of local food sovereignty in the face of the loss of
Mesoamerican agro-biodiversity that is occurring
in their territories.

Concluding Remarks

I

n a country that is profoundly characterized
by its biocultural richness, it is difficult to
design any conservation policies without taking
into account the profound relationship that has
existed since time immemorial between nature
and culture. In Mexico, each species of plants and
animals, each type of soil and landscape nearly
always has a corresponding linguistic expression,
a category of knowledge, a practical use, a religious
meaning, a role in ritual, and an individual
or collective vitality. To safeguard the natural
heritage of a country without safeguarding the
cultures that have given it shape and meaning is to
reduce nature to something beyond recognition—
static, distant, nearly dead. Similarly, it is not
possible to safeguard cultures while destroying the
surrounding nature that support them and gives
meaning to their existence. That is a simple but
inescapable and vital principle.

Source: Langscape vol. 2 no. 6, Summer 2010, pp. 7-13.

REFERENCES
Barrera-Bassols, N., M. Astier, Q. Orozco and E. Boege. 2009. Saberes
locales y defensa de la agro-diversidad: maíces nativos contra maíces
transgénicos en México. Papeles 107: 77-92 www.revistapapeles.
fuhem.es
Boege, E. 2008. El Patrimonio Biocultural de los Pueblos Indígenas
de México. Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia y Comisión
Nacional para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos Indígenas. México, 342 pp.
CONABIO (Comisión Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso de la
Biodiversidad). 2008. Capital Natural de México. Volumen I, II y III.
Elizondo, C. and D. López-Merlin. 2009. Las Areas de Conservación
Voluntaria en Quintana Roo. El Colegio de la Frontera Sur. México.
INALI, 2007. Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas. www.inali.gob.
mx/catalogo2007
Maffi, L. 2005. Linguistic, cultural and biological diversity. Annu. Rev.
Anthropol. 29: 599-617.
Moguel P. and V. M. Toledo. 1999. Biodiversity conservation in
traditional coffee systems of Mexico. Conservation Biology 13: 11-21.
Moguel P. and V. M. Toledo. 2004. Conservar produciendo:
biodiversidad, café organico y jardines productivos. Biodiversitas 55:
1-7. www.biodiversidad.gob.mx/Biodiversitas/Articulos/
Ortega-Paczka, R. 2003. La diversidad del maíz en México. In: Esteva,
G. and C. Marielle (eds) Sin Maíz no hay País. Culturas populares,
México.
Oviedo, G., L. Maffi, and P.B. Larsen. 2000. Indigenous and Traditional
Peoples of the World and Ecoregion Conservation: An Integrated
Approach to Conserving the World’s Biological and Cultural Diversity,
and companion map Indigenous and Traditional Peoples and the
Global 200 Ecoregions. Gland, Switzerland: WWF-International and
Terralingua.
Perales, H., B.F. Benz and S.Brush. 2005. Maize diversity and linguistic
diversity in Chiapas, Mexico. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences (PNAS) 102: 949-954.
Toledo, V.M. 2003. Los pueblos indígenas, actores estratégicos para
el Corredor Biológico Mesoamericano. Biodiversitas 47: 8-15. www.
biodiversidad.gob.mx/Biodiversitas/Articulos/
Toledo, V.M. y N. Barrera-Bassols. 2008. La Memoria Biocultural.
Editorial Icaria, Barcelona.

BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 31

Gleb Raygorodetsky

The World We Want:
Ensuring Our Collective Bioculturally Resilient Future

32 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

“

It’s not that we have a philosophical
difference with the fossil fuel industry,”
says Bill McKibben 1 the founder of 350.org 2 ,
a non-profit organization that is building
a global grassroots movement to solve the
climate crisis, “it’s that their business model
is destroying the planet.” The business
models, however, do not appear out of thin
air, but emerge out of a particular worldview,
a paradigm that defines how we perceive
and interpret the world and ultimately
guides our actions. In order to revert, halt,
or simply slow down the escalating pace
and expanding scale of devastation that
humankind is inf licting upon the Earth,
we must acknowledge the causative links
between our worldviews and the business
models that wreak havoc on our planet.
Tla-o-qui-aht Ha’huulthii (Traditional Territory), Clayoquot
Sound, Vancouver Island, British Columbia.From the top
of the Wah-nah-jus (Lone Cone Mountain) at the western
edge of the Meares Island Tribal Park, the co-director of Tlao-qui-aht First Nation Tribal Parks Eli Ens, embraces his
people’s Ha’huulthii – traditional territory. The Tribal Parks
are land and sea designations within Tla-o-qui-aht territory,
managed by and for the Tla-o-qui-aht people to better
harmonize environmental and human well-being. Photo ©
Gleb Raygorodetsky, 2013
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 33

Ukok Plateau, Altai, Russia. Maria Amanchina, a traditional Altai shaman and healer, is standing over a
kurgan, or a burial mound, on Ukok Plateau, where a 2,400-year-old mummy of a Pazyryk noblewoman,
the “Ice Princess”, was excavated by archaeologists in 1993 to great international fanfare. She feels that the
dominant Western mindset pierces the heart of the Earth as it digs for gold, drills for oil, and unearths and
removes archaeological “artifacts”. This very worldview is responsible for upsetting the intricate balance of
the Altai and the rest of living Mother Earth. Maria is convinced that only through reclaiming our reverential
relationship with the sacred and spiritual worlds can we restore the balance. Photo © Gleb Raygorodetsky
2013
Such acknowledgment is particularly timely, as the current global system towards one that is
the United Nations and world leaders are wrapping more equitable and just towards all people and
up yet another soul-searching quest to define a the planet, because they are a product of the very
new development path for the global community. same system—with all its constraints, assumptions
The “World We Want” Agenda3 will be launched and limitations—that has led to the current
in 2015, as the implementation period for reaching environmental, social and spiritual crises.
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
This system is firmly rooted in a reductionist5 ,
comes to a close. It is quite clear that many of the largely linear, dualistic paradigm, which postulates
MDGs4—ranging from reducing extreme poverty nature and culture as distinct entities and humans
by 50%, to halting the spread of HIV/AIDS, to as separate from nature 6 . This view conceives
achieving environmental sustainability—will not of human wellbeing as directly dependent on
be attained by 2015. Yet, the ultimate reasons for their embeddedness in the global consumerist 7
such shortfall are not being acknowledged. The economy and therefore encourages unbridled
MDGs are unsuitable benchmarks for transforming economic growth and development with little
34 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

The Banaue Rice Terraces, Ifugao, Philippines. The Rice Terraces of Ifugao are considered to be the 8th
wonder of the world. Ever since the Indigenous peoples of Ifugao carved the terraces out of the hillside
about 2,000-3,000 years ago, they’ve been following traditional calendar of rice planting and harvesting.
Climate change throws traditional rice planting and harvesting calendars out of whack, like this downpour
in normally dry month of April. Unpredictable shifts in rainfall patterns make it hard for Indigenous peoples
to produce enough traditional rice for family subsistence. Many local residents have to seek seasonal jobs
away from home in order to earn extra cash to buy the rice and other foods they need to survive.Photo ©
Gleb Raygorodetsky, 2013
concern for the negative environmental and social
consequences. This paradigm is naively ignorant
of the interdependence of people and nature and
averse to creating or nurturing conditions that
sustain such relations. This paradigm fails to reflect
the true essence of our relationship with each
other and the Earth and is therefore unhelpful in
addressing the ultimate and proximate causes of
our planet’s imperiled condition.
As the environmental and social consequences of
human-induced changes are becoming increasingly
apparent, there is a growing recognition that the
ways of thinking and acting stemming from this
worldview must be cast aside. Albert Einstein

observed that, “the significant problems we face
cannot be solved at the same level of thinking we
were at when we created them”.8 We must concede
that, to date, no amount of technological tweaking,
guided by the dominant worldview, has moved
humankind from its predicament. An alternative
way of thinking must be nurtured that is aligned
with the nature of Nature. For the post-2015 World
We Want to be more environmentally and socially
balanced, our collective actions must be guided
by a worldview that more closely ref lects the
inextricable links between human well-being and
the interdependence and interconnectedness of all
life.
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 35

Llanchamacocha, Sapara Traditional Territory, Ecuador. Photo © Gleb Raygorodetsky, 2013

36 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

Albert Einstein observed that, “the significant problems we face cannot
be solved at the same level of thinking we were at when we created them”.
We must concede that, to date, no amount of technological tweaking,
guided by the dominant worldview, has moved humankind from its
predicament. An alternative way of thinking must be nurtured that is
aligned with the nature of Nature.

R

ecent years have seen the emergence of
a number of integrative disciplines, such as
Systems Science9, Resilience Science10, Ecosystem
Health 11 , Ethnoecology 12 , Deep Ecology 13 , Gaia
Theory 14 and others. These fields of inquiry seek
to advance our understanding of the complex
non-linear and multi-dimensional interactions
between culture and nature, incorporating insights
from both the biological and the social sciences.
Local and international organizations involved in
biodiversity conservation, wildlife management,
cultural preservation and sustainable development
are becoming gradually engaged in exploring such
synergistic approaches and integrating them into
decision- and policymaking processes.
Regrettably, the specialization and power
hierarchies in the natural and social sciences
continue to support an environment of learning
and practice that is mired by intellectual
compertmentalisation, exacerbating the problems
we face rather than promoting solutions. Still, there
is an emerging recognition that as we contemplate
and try to transform today’s economic, political and
personal realities into a more sustainable, equitable
and diverse world, we must rely on the holistic view
of human-environment interactions15. We have to
discover (or re-discover) more synergistic ways of
envisioning and interpreting social and ecological
systems, as well as the environmental and cultural
problems beleaguering them. We must grow wiser,
so that the way we experience, interact with and
value the Earth and its constituent elements is
firmly grounded in an inherently holistic worldview.

O

ne integrative way of looking at the
world and our relationship with it is through
the lens of biocultural diversity16. Luisa Maffi, one
of the pioneers of this synergistic field of inquiry,
characterizes biocultural diversity as “the pulsating
heart of the globe, the multi-faceted expression of
the beauty and potential of life on this planet —
a precious gift for everyone to cherish and care
for.17” Biocultural diversity describes life-sustaining
interdependencies and co-evolution of various
forms of diversity — a view of the world that has
been integral to indigenous ways of knowing —
from landscapes to ecosystems, from foodways to
languages.

Proponents and practitioners valuing biocultural
diversity — at global, regional and local scales —
are working hard to infuse the fields of education,
policy, conservation and sustainable development
with more holistic models and practical approaches.
“It is hard to ignore the similarities between the
practical forces driving biological extinctions
and cultural homogenization,18 ” contends David
Harmon, the President of the George Wright
Society. “The only effective way to meet them is
with a cohesive, biocultural response.”
Millennia of co-evolutionary relationships
between humans and their surroundings — with
people relying on their environment for survival
while adapting to and modifying it — gave rise to
a tremendous diversity of bioculturally-endowed
systems around the globe. These systems continue
to endure today, as documented in Luisa Maffi’s
latest book on the subject, Biocultural Diversity
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 37

Biocultural diversity describes life-sustaining interdependencies and
co-evolution of various forms of diversity — a view of the world that
has been integral to indigenous ways of knowing — from landscapes
to ecosystems, from foodways to languages.

Conservation: A Global Sourcebook 19 . Many such
examples come from indigenous peoples who
maintain biocultural systems worldwide through
nurturing an intimate relationship with their
traditional territories, something that our modern
societies have all but forgotten.

verge of flipping into a new, potentially irreversible
state—like a switch from coral- to algae-dominated
systems, from rainforest to savannah, from
commons to private property, from subsistence
to market-based economy, from relationships to
consumption. Functional overlap is a reflection
of redundancy in the system that enhances its
continuity when some of its elements undergo
change—for example carbon sequestration by
different parts of an ecosystem; traditional diets
based on varied sources of protein; or subsistence
harvest regulated through different governance
arrangements. Substantial social capital — in the
form of trusted social networks, wise leadership,
intergenerational transmission of knowledge, an
equitable integration of different ways of knowing
into decision-making — also allows for diverse
systemic responses to change.

The essential feature of biocultural systems that
has ensured their persistence in time and space
has been their resilience20. Prominent resilience
scientist Dr. Brian Walker describes resilience as
the propensity of a system to learn, adapt, selforganize (through co-evolution between different
sub-systems) and absorb change without losing
its functional integrity 21 . Resilient systems are
characterized by a diversity of patterns, functions,
and processes that ensures a wide range of
responses to external or internal challenges—from
nutrient cycles to ecological niches, from interand intra-specific variability to richness among
Maintaining and enhancing the resilience of
and within languages, from epistemologies to biocultural systems is fundamental to sustaining
traditional institutions of governance.
social and ecological systems and achieving the
nother important characteristic of a coveted goal of sustainability – meeting “the needs
resilient system is its modularity, the presence of the present without compromising the ability
23
of relatively autonomous “nodes” (e.g., local of future generations to meet their own needs ”.
communities, ecological refugia, pastoral networks) The current trajectory of humankind’s “progress”
throughout a system that reduces its over- however, is pushing us outside of what the
Center
connectedness and therefore enhances its ability researchers from the Stockholm Resilience
24
to resist rapid transmission of environmental describe as the planetary boundaries and away
and social shocks. Tight feedback loops between from a future that is resilient and endowed with
various elements of biocultural systems enable biocultural diversity.

A

detection of approaching tipping points, or
thresholds22 , long before the system is on the

38 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

Several factors limit our ability to correct our
course toward a more bioculturally resilient world:

•
Wisdom, knowledge, practice and values
embedded in local worldviews that have evolved
over millennia to recognize the interconnectedness
of people and nature, are rapidly eroding among
land-based communities and indigenous peoples
who value their relationships with Mother Earth
and all its beings25 . Among other things, this is
often a result of external and internal pressures that
instill a false sense of inferiority of such worldviews
relative to the dominant one.

current focus on “feel-good” stories in addressing
global crises is not helpful for making this choice.
However enticing and comforting it is for us to
follow the dangling carrot of proclamations that
“Changing the world does not have to conf lict
with living the life you want”, as the authors of
Worldchanging: A Users Guide for the 21st Century31
argue, such a mindset does not ref lect the real
scope of the changes we must make. Neither does
the sentiment that the current crises could be
•
T he s c ie nt if ic com munit y lack s addressed by simply modifying a business model
conceptual or methodological agreement 26 instead of completely re-conceptualizing our
on how to internalize the interdependent nature relationship with the planet.
of biological and cultural diversities and the
Whether or not humankind is going to succeed
common threats to them into research agendas and in transitioning into the Ecozoic Age depends
conservation and management approaches.
ultimately on our individual and collective
•
There are too few models, guidelines courage to commit to a more holistic worldview
and tools for the policymaking and management that is based on valuing biocultural diversity for
communities that explicitly integrate biocultural our own and our planet’s well-being. For such a
transformation to occur, a few key elements must
diversity and resilience.
be present. We must accept the fact that change
•
Human and financial resources are as an inalienable part of life, and we should not
limited for implementing and sustaining always be trying to avert it at any cost32. We must
biocultural-diversity-based initiatives among the be realistic about the scope and scale of what
groups who are interested in integrating them into should be done to correct the course, as well as
their strategies and actions.
what each of us is capable of doing. We must also
•
There is poor understanding among the expand our notion of community from a group
general public that, in the words of the late Dr. of people united by their geographic or genetic
Darrell Posey, there are “inextricable links between proximity, to a broader global community inclusive
biological and cultural diversity 27.” Hence, the of other like-minded individuals and groups united
impact of individual and collective decisions and by their recognition of the value of biocultural
actions28 on resilience of biocultural systems are diversity as the very “pulsating heart” of Nature.
Ultimately, we must move toward a biologically
poorly understood.
The late Thomas Berry, a renowned cultural and culturally rich world not only through our
historian and ecotheologian, described our age as work, but more importantly by changing our own
the dark end of the 65 million year-old Cenozoic29 thinking and actions to be guided by principles
evolutionary tunnel. Whether we can emerge of reciprocity, respect and reverence toward
from the twilight of self-inflicted crises into the each other and the planet. Only through such
light of an Ecozoic era30 —when human conduct comprehensive transformation of our own nature
would be based on valuing the Earth community could we hope to ensure that Nature remains
as an integrated web of mutually synergetic bioculturally resilient for generations to come. u

relationships—depends on our gumption to choose Source: Langscape vol. 2 no. 12, Autumn 2013, pp. 76-83.
the alternative path and our will to stay on it. The
BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 39

The World We Want - Gleb Raygorodetsky
1.
http://www.examiner.com/slideshow/oil-subsidies-andprofits-increase-along-with-record-high-temperatures
2.
http://350.org/
3.
http://www.worldwewant2015.org
4.
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/
5.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Reductionism#Reductionism_and_science
6.
Yrjö Haila. 2000. Beyond the Nature-Culture Dualism.
Biology and Philosophy. Volume 15, Issue 2, pp 155-175.
7. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consumerism
8.
http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Albert_Einstein
9.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systems_science
10.
Walker, B.H. and D. Salt. 2006. Resilience Thinking:
Sustaining Ecosystems and People in a Changing
World. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
11.
Costanza, R., Norton, B., and B. Haskell. 1992. Ecosystem
health: new goals for environmental management. Island Press.
12.
Nazarea, Virginia (1999). Ethnoecology: Situated Knowledge/
Located Lives. Tucson: The University of Arizona Press.
13.
Devall, W. and G. Sessions. 1985. Deep Ecology: Living
As if Nature Mattered Salt Lake City: Gibbs M. Smith, Inc.
14.
Lovelock, James (2000) [1979]. Gaia: A New Look
at Life on Earth (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press.
15. Capra, F. 1996. The Web of Life. Harper Collins.
16.
Maffi, L. and E. Woodley. 2010. Biocultural Diversity
Conservation: A Global Sourcebook. Earthscan, London.
17.
http://www.terralingua.org/bcdconservation/
18.
Harmon, D. 2002. In light of our differences:
How diversity in nature and culture makes us human.
Washington, D.C: Smithsonian Institution Press.
19.
www.terralingua.org/bcdconservation/?page_id=336
20.
http://www.resalliance.org/index.php/resilience
21.
Walker, B.H. and D. Salt. 2006. Resilience Thinking:
Sustaining Ecosystems and People in a Changing
World. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
22.
http://www.resalliance.org/index.php/thresholds_database
23.
World Commission on Environment and Development.
1987. Our common future. London, Oxford University Press.
24.
Rockström, J., et. al. 2009. A safe operating
space for humanity. Nature 461. Pages 472-475.
25.
http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=46SPO73_FIc&feature=g-user-u
26.
Sharachchandra, L. 2011. Rereading the interdisciplinary
mindscape: a response to Redford. Oryx, 45, pp 331-332.
27.
Declaration of Belem. 1988. Available on-line http://
ethnobiology.net/docs/DeclarationofBelem.pdf
28.
http://www.wikihow.com/Help-Protect-Biodiversity
29.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cenozoic
30.
Berry, T. 1991. Eleventh Annual E. F. Schumacher
Lectures. Hannum H. Ed. E. F. Schumacher
Society (now New Economics Institute)
31.
Steffen, A. 206. Worldchanging: A User’s Guide
for the 21st Century. Harry N. Abrams, Inc.
32.
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/19/science/earth/as-coastsrebuild-and-us-pays-again-critics-stop-to-ask-why.html?hp&_r=1&

40 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

Biocultural Diversity Glossary
Biocultural Diversity

Comprises the diversity of life in all of its manifestations: biological, cultural, and linguistic, which are
interrelated (and likely coevolved) within a complex socio-ecological adaptive system. This definition
includes the following key elements:
•
•
•

The diversity of life is made up not only of the diversity of plants and animal species, habitats, and
ecosystems found on the planet, but also of the diversity of human cultures and languages.
These diversities do not exist in separate and parallel realms, but rather are different
manifestations of a single, complex whole.
The links among these diversities have developed over time thorough the cumulative global effects
of mutual adaptations, likely of a co-evolutionary nature, between humans and the environment
at the local level.

Indigenous or tribal

The terms “indigenous” and “tribal” can be understood according to the definition in Article 1 of the
International Labour Organization’s Convention 169 on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent
Countries (I.L.O. 169), which states that the Convention applies to:
(a) Tribal peoples in independent countries whose social, cultural and economic conditions distinguish
them from other sections of the national community, and whose status is regulated wholly or partially
by their own customs or traditions or by special laws or regulations;
(b) Peoples in independent countries who are regarded as indigenous on account of their descent from
the populations which inhabited the country, or a geographical region to which the country belongs,
at the time of conquest or colonisation or the establishment of present State boundaries and who,
irrespective of their legal status, retain some or all of their own social, economic, cultural and political
institutions.

Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK)

Traditional Ecological Knowledge is “[a] cumulative body of knowledge, practice, and belief, evolving
by adaptive processes and handed down through generations by cultural transmission, about the
relationships of living beings (including humans) with one another and with their environment”. (Fikret
Berkes) The term “traditional”, as used in this context, should not be taken to refer to something static
and homogeneous. Rather, “tradition” should be understood as “a filter through which innovation
occurs” (Darrell Posey), a “tradition of invention and innovation” (Pereira and Gupta). In a report to the
Convention on Biological Diversity, the Four Directions Council of Canada explains: “What is ‘traditional’
about traditional knowledge is not its antiquity, but the way it is acquired and used. In other words,
the social process of learning and sharing knowledge, which is unique to each Indigenous culture, lies
at the very heart of its ‘traditionality’. Much of this knowledge is actually quite new, but it has a social
meaning, and legal character, entirely unlike the knowledge indigenous people acquire from settlers and
industrialised societies” (Four Directions Council). Traditional knowledge also varies according to age,
gender, and a host of other variables.

BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 41

For More In formation

Dr. Luisa Maffi
Co-founder and Director, Terralingua
217 Baker Road
Salt Spring Island, BC, V8K 2N6
Canada
email: maffi@terralingua.org
phone: 1.250.538.0939
David Harmon
Co-founder, Terralingua
dharmon@georgewright. org
Website:
www.terralingua.org

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Terralingua’s Biocultural Diversity Toolkit project
was supported by the Swift Foundation.

O

We also acknowledge the general support of The Christensen
Fund (TCF) and the Kalliopeia Foundation.

42 Biocultural Diversity Toolkit | BCD INTRO

From genes, species, ecosystems, landscapes and seascapes, to languages,
practices, traditions, artistic expressions and belief, value and knowledge
systems, these diversities are facing unprecedented changes, and most
importantly loss. The impact of reduction in bio-cultural diversity on the
resilience of the planetary systems is profound. In the current global change
context, the loss of biological diversity, with the simultaneous loss of languages,
knowledge systems, and specific ways of life, has resulted in new challenges for
coupled social-ecological systems.
To address these challenges, it is critical that the links between biological
and cultural diversity - encompassing, inter alia, languages as repositories of
knowledge and practices, tangible and intangible heritage related to nature,
modes of subsistence, economic and social relations and belief systems – are
taken into consideration in policy development at all scales.
--Report of the International Conference on Biological and Cultural Diversity for Development. Tenth
Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD COP 10),
Nagoya, Japan, 18-29 October 2010. UNEP/CBD/COP/10/INF/3.

Te r r alingua
unity in biocultural diversity

BCD INTRO | Biocultural Diversity Toolkit 43
 CANBERRA — The debate over the use of genetically modified organisms, or GMOs, in food production contains many sides and perspectives — all argued passionately by their advocates. With a food-secure future being far from certain, it is a debate that can have far-reaching impacts on the development space. 
 What happens when we remove multinationals and corporate profit from the GMO debate? 
 In this five-part series, Devex looks at how perspectives of doing good through science versus corporate interests changes the outcome of the polarized GMO issue. 
 Large corporations producing genetically modified seeds dominate the debate, with activists questioning their motives and whether they have the ability to achieve social good while making a profit. But the technology to produce GMOs is becoming increasingly cheaper and democratized, opening the door to new plant varieties that are in the hands of the public, not just companies. 
 Devex is looking at various sides of the GMO debate to understand the continuing concerns and issues of this vital area. Inpart one of our series, we considered the perspective of the scientific community, which argues that there has been no evidence of GMOs impacting health or the environment and say they are a critical component for creating a food-secure future. 
 In part two we now examine arguments from those who strongly oppose GMOs in the development sector, and explore why they do not believe the use of GMOs are as inevitable as some scientists believe. 
 The arguments of both Greenpeace and Fairtrade against GMOs are similar — the risks that GMOs pose are still unknown, and they may have unforeseeable environmental, social, and health impacts. 
 “There is widespread public concern about the long-term effects of GMO crops,” Gelkha Buitrago, head of standards at Fairtrade International, explained to Devex. “Contamination of conventional crops and wild plants, potential damage to wildlife, and the uncertain effects on human health when consuming these foods.” 
 And there are social impacts, the groups argue, especially on the world’s poorest communities. 
 “The core of Fairtrade’s work is empowering farmers and workers, so they have more control over their lives and can chart their own development paths,” Buitrago said. “Fairtrade believes that the dependence of producers on GMO seeds and the companies that market them is against their long-term interests and outweighs any short-term benefits the crops may bring.” 
 According to Juliet Perry, from Greenpeace’s Asia Pacific Communications Hub, the promotion of GMO crops represents a corporate takeover of food systems with six corporations —Monsanto,DuPont,Dow,Syngenta,Bayer, andBASF — now controlling 75 percent of the world pesticides market, 63 percent of the commercial seed market, and more than 75 percent of all private sector research into seeds and pesticides. 
 “GE [genetically engineered] crops are used as a lure to make farmers dependent on buying seeds and agrochemicals every year from big corporations that market them as wonder crops,” Perry said. “The reality is vastly different, but once hooked, farmers lose control of the seeds they once used and are unable to continue using ecological pest management. Instead, farmers have no choice but to buy the full package of pesticides that need to be used with the GE seeds to ensure they perform.” 
 To support the growing food and nutrition challenges, both organizations agree that there is still much more that can be done with improved agricultural processes, ecological agriculture, and equitable access to food. GMO is not the food security answer the world needs, they insist. 
 The influence of Greenpeace and Fairtrade 
 Greenpeace has been operating for nearly five decades, with offices in more than 40 countries, and with a household name associated with environmental protection and advocacy. They are a highly influential body both publicly and politically. 
 Fairtrade is not as prominent politically, but within developing countries they have the ability to improve economic livelihoods and grow and enhance local industries. Currently, Fairtrade standards prohibit the use of GMOs by all producers, including hired labor and small farmer organizations. The use of GMO materials is checked as part of the audit process for Fairtrade standard. 
 Fairtrade certification does not necessarily mean a product is organic — only 52 percent of Fairtrade producers are organic certified. The use of pesticides are, however, regulated. 
 Buitrago explained that the prohibition of GMOs means that farmers producing products with GMO varieties — such as cotton and rice — require verification from suppliers that the seed or planting stock is GMO free. Major Fairtrade products including coffee, bananas, and cocoa are not yet impacted, but this may change with GMO options for bananasexpected to be available soon. 
 For national leaders deciding on whether GMO crops will be supported or banned from cultivation within their borders, both Greenpeace and Fairtrade are influential voices in the debate — especially within developing countries. In the Philippines, the largest supplier of GMOs in Southeast Asia, Greenpeace has engaged in legal action against government GMO legislation. And in Uganda, the importance of Fairtrade to the country has seen their president, Yoweri Museveni, present for the opening of a fairtrade coffee factory. 
 Influencing public opinion 
 Seeking to influence global public opinion is a vital part of the GMO debate. Interestingly, the message used to try and win public agreement is similar for both pro- and anti-GMO campaigners. Both argue that the opposition is influencing politics through lobbyists and that the weight of scientific evidence is on their side. 
 “The biotech industry continues to heavily promote the old model of industrial agriculture — including genetic engineering — by lobbying governments and running public relations campaigns that falsely promote GE crops as the only solution,” Perry said. “As a result, billions of dollars of public and private investments and subsidies, as well as research and development and innovation funds, are funnelled towards industrial agriculture instead of being invested in making ecofood widely available and affordable. This forms an obstacle for the growth of ecological agriculture.” 
 Get development's most important headlines in your inbox every day. 
 Thanks for subscribing! 
 This particular report is nearing its 10-year anniversary, and research included is older still. By 2013, the World Bank reported they would continue to respond to client requests relating to new technologies, including GMOs, understanding their “potential to contribute to poverty reduction, economic growth, and environmental sustainability.” 
 In fact, more recent science can both sway for and against GMOs — depending on the research quoted. While the pro-GMO side quotes research showing no evidence of human health impacts, the anti-GMO side looks at evidence of environmental impacts fromincreased use of herbicide for GMO crops — primarily the impact of pesticide resistant crops produced by for-profit corporations. 
 Corporates still dominate the conversation 
 The arguments from Greenpeace, Fairtrade, and other anti-GMO campaigners are still heavily focused on the impact of corporations in the conversation. According to the Council for Biotechnology Information — whose members include BASF, Bayer, Dow, DuPont Pioneer, Monsanto, and Syngenta — regulatory science requires GMOs to pass more than 75 different safety tests. On average, each GMO takes an average of 13 years at a cost of $130 million in research and development before reaching the market. This rigorous testing and approval process means it is easier for the well-funded corporate sector to dominate the GMO market. 
 But as costs involved in the scientific research are now dropping, GMO technology can become more accessible for “public good” projects — where researchers focus on localized production issues such asdiseased papaya in Hawaii or bananas in Uganda — and with intellectual property maintained in the public domain, the question is whether this changes the nature of companies’ role in food security. 
 For organizations such as Greenpeace and Fairtrade, however, such shifts still do little to alleviate their suspicion of corporate involvement and intention. 
 “The biotech industry claims that farmers will benefit from growing GMO crops through larger harvests and a reduced need for pesticides,” Buitrago said. “We do not think that genetically modified crops can contribute to sustainability in the long run. Instead, they increase dependencies on external inputs, and discourage an integrated approach in the production system, thus inhibiting resiliency.” 
 “Even if a genetically modified plant has a public intellectual property, the concerns mentioned remain. Dependency on external inputs — such as pesticides — and the long-term effects still prevail,” Buitrago added. 
 Can the conversation on GMOs change? 
 There is a strong argument from both anti-GMO and pro-GMO campaigners that solutions to food security need to encompass a range of new options, including improving soil conditions, changing farming practices to reduce waste, and encouraging diversity in crops grown for better nutrition options. But while many scientists in this field believe GMO should be part of the solution, Greenpeace and Fairtrade currently do not. 
 Greenpeace and Fairtrade both explained that they have found no evidence yet to change their stance on GMOs. But for Fairtrade in particular, their position is influenced by the needs and demands of their stakeholders. 
 “Fairtrade International is a multistakeholder association,” Buitrago said. “Farmers and workers are half-owners of the Fairtrade system, with 50 percent of the votes in Fairtrade’s General Assembly — the highest decision-making body. This allows us to learn directly from farmers and workers about the challenges they face, including issues related to GMOs. It also gives us the responsibility to tailor standards and additional support programs to their need. So far, the concerns producers have expressed regarding GMOs prevail — regardless whether private- or public-led — and Fairtrade continues to support organic production. 
 “We’re currently reviewing the Fairtrade Standard for Small Producer Organizations, including environmental aspects. Preliminary results of the first consultation round do not show interest from internal or external parties to allow GMOs in Fairtrade-certified production.” 
 Greenpeace, Perry explained, is not opposed to biotechnology in confined environments. 
 “Like for example in medical sector for the development of drugs and pharmaceuticals,” she said. “In fact, Greenpeace supportsMarker assisted selection which uses genetic markers to identify existing traits in plants — such as drought tolerance — without artificially transferring genes from one organism to another. Stress traits, such as those needed to resist droughts or floods, are generally regulated by multiple genes, tightly controlled by highly complex interactions.” 
 All other options have not been exhausted 
 Anti-GMO campaigners in the developing world say stronger food security can be achieved through better practices associated with ecological agriculture — including changing farming practices to create sustainable soils and reduce erosion, enhancing soil structure to to help 
 increase and hold water infiltration, increase agricultural productivity in rain-fed areas, and continued breeding of crop varieties that can withstand drought stresses and still produce a reliable yield. And these options must be exhausted before GMO is put on the table. 
 “The biggest challenge the world and [that]  many farmers are facing today in relation to climate change is to increase their resiliency to respond to extreme weather events,” Perry said. “What has to be done is to strengthen farming and rural communities to be able to recover quickly after major extreme weather events and to anticipate them and to change the current failing industrial food system.” 
 “GE crops and industrial agriculture are also more susceptible to climate shocks like floods and drought than ecological farming, which is a model based on biodiversity that can help withstand erratic climate patterns and ensure food security. As our climate changes, ecological farming is the solution to maintain our food security.” 
 A focus on the development issues 
 Despite strong opposition to GE crops, there are a number of donors investigating the role GMOs could play in creating a food-secure future, especially in developing countries. 
 In part three of our series Devex will look at these donors, including their reasoning, the challenges they face, and what future they see for GMOs in food security. 
 Lisa Cornish is a Devex Reporter based in Canberra, where she focuses on the Australian aid community. Lisa formerly worked with News Corp Australia as a data journalist for the national network and was published throughout Australia in major metropolitan and regional newspapers, including the Daily Telegraph in Melbourne, Herald Sun in Melbourne, Courier-Mail in Brisbane, and online through news.com.au. Lisa additionally consults with Australian government providing data analytics, reporting and visualization services. Lisa was awarded the 2014 Journalist of the Year by the New South Wales Institute of Surveyors. 
www.aboutvalues.net

FACTSHEET

Maintenance of genetic diversity
In a nutshell
Genetic diversity (the variety of genes between and within species populations) distinguishes different
breeds or races from each other, providing the basis for locally well-adapted cultivars and a gene pool
for developing commercial crops, livestock, as well as commercial products (e.g. pharmaceuticals,
cosmetics and flavourings).

1. Role for human well-being
Agricultural producers and local people benefit (in terms of subsistence and commercial use) from the
diversity of crops and wild plants and animals adapted to local conditions. The term "agrobiodiversity"
is used to refer to the genetic diversity important for food and agriculture. In the Philippines, (see
SEARICE-report p. 38 ff.) an initiative to conserve local varieties of rice aided the development of rice
strains that are better adapted to local conditions - giving greater yield, a high quality seed supply, and
decreasing dependence on plant breeders at a much lower cost than that of commercial plant breeding.
In addition, genetic diversity plays a role in preserving options for the future: we cannot know which
plants or animals will be especially important for humans in the future, such as which species may
contain a substance useful for making a specific medicine.

2. Typical threats
The main reasons for the loss of genetic diversity are the loss of forest cover, coastal wetlands and
other ‘wild’ uncultivated areas with high biodiversity and the destruction of the aquatic environment.
The FAO reports that the state of agrobiodiversity is alarming: since the beginning of the 20th century,
the world has lost 90% of agrobiodiversity for 20 of its major staple food crops. Genetic resources in
agriculture have mainly been lost through the loss of traditional cultivars of crop species (due in part
to the adoption of industrial farming practices and varieties) and through species extinction, see
Greenfacts. Further issues in agriculture are the promotion of commercial (genetically modified) seed
varieties and the exclusion of genetic variations via patent procedures. Additionally, patents taken out
by life science companies can prevent local people from benefiting financially from the commercial use
of plants or animals for medicine and at its worst exclude them formally even from subsistence use.
The introduction of invasive species into ecosystems is another growing threat. In many cases – especially in most developing countries – climate change will have a negative impact on wild and cultivated
genetic diversity. This implies a need for new crop varieties that can withstand the regional or local
effects of climate change in order to ensure food security.

Visit ValuES: www.aboutvalues.net

www.aboutvalues.net

3. Example indicators
•

The dependence of households on local adapted crop species is an indicator of their value.

•

Genetic diversity of crop products. For example, in Germany the indicator genetic diversity is used
to show the endangerment of genetic resources for food and agriculture, initially using selected
indigenous breeds as examples.

•

Ex-situ crop collection indicates the dynamics of the bio- and geographical diversity contained
within ex-situ collections over time.

•

The indicator genetic diversity of terrestrial domesticated animals shows the rate of genetic or
breed diversity of farmed or domesticated animals, which in turn offers vital options for adapting
livestock production to future challenges.

•

Trends in invasive alien species measures plants, animals and micro-organisms outside their natural geographic range and thus the threat to genetic diversity.

Global available sources for national data:
•

The Global Biodiversity Information Facility is the biggest biodiversity database on the internet.

•

See the Crop Wild Relatives Global Atlas and Vincent et al. (2013) for a prioritised crop wild relative
inventory to help underpin global food security.

4. Example methods
For assessing the value of this ecosystem service:
•

Damage costs and avoided costs as well as Reparation costs – here a loss is not irreversible

•

Contingent valuation

•

Choice experiments

•

See the report Valuing Participatory Plant Breeding for a review of tools and methods
based on case studies.

•

Surveys or questionnaires focusing on the crop species used in order to understand humans’ dependence on them.

For assessing the condition of this ecosystem service:
•

Mean species abundance is an indicator of naturalness or biodiversity intactness. It is defined as
the mean abundance of original species relative to their abundance in undisturbed ecosystems.

•

Using participatory research methods such as questionnaires, conducting interviews with key informants, focus group discussions etc., a wide range of relevant information can be collected. Such
as the identification of used crop landraces based on morphological characteristics; traditional
knowledge, beliefs and biocultural heritage associated with all aspects of crop cultivation and
identify the custodians. See for example:
•

Documentation of yam diversity and associated traditional knowledge systems in Yap
state, Federated States of Micronesia (FSM)

•

Participatory Methods to assess traditional breeding systems.

Visit ValuES: www.aboutvalues.net

www.aboutvalues.net

5. Managing this service
Typical instrument for managing this services include:
Protection of habitats
•

The protection of natural or semi-natural habitats is key to the large-scale preservation of genetic
diversity. In Choiseul, Solomon Islands, analysing ecosystem services and environmental pressures
helped to optimise the location of protected areas and protected area networks.

For further background information and examples, see the ValuES factsheet Habitats for species.
In-situ conservation of endangered species
•

Snow leopards are an endangered ‘flagship species’ in the Himalayan region and are play a key role
in maintaining the mountain ecosystem. A village-run insurance programme for valuable large
livestock such as yaks, cattle and horses has been set up and funded. The programme is focused
on better herding practices and making more wild prey available, compensating for the total costs
of animals lost by means of insurance programmes, and finally an awareness raising programme.

•

A nest protection and a by-catch and release programme in Watamu Beach, Kenya, have been enabling local communities to preserve and monitor endangered turtles and their nests.

Conservation of crop diversity and traditional cultivars of crop species
•

The Crop Trust supports a range of activities designed to ensure that collections of crops are better understood, more easily available, more safely conserved, and more securely funded. The
Trust supports the conservation of crop diversity in gene banks worldwide and, by way of a backup for these valuable seed collections – the sub-national Svalbard Global Seed Vault.

•

The International Institute of Tropical Agriculture offers guidance on, among other things, Strategies for Sustainable Maize Seed Production in West and Central Africa.

•

For case studies from China, e.g. on how to ensure the sustainability of wild relatives of crops or
traditional land use practices, see: Mountain Gods and Wild Rice - Agrobiodiversity as a Basis for
Human Existence.

•

The Global Horticulture Initiative offers capacity building and advocacy related to this service.

•

By establishing payments for agrobiodiversity conservation services rural communities can be
rewarded for maintaining traditional crop varieties rather than using (more profitable) commercial
ones.

Bioversity International provides scientific evidence of the role that on-farm biodiversity, wild agricultural biodiversity and forest biodiversity can play in a more nutritious, resilient, productive and adaptable food and agricultural system.
Compiled by: Florian Manns, UFZ. 2014.
Contact: info@aboutvalues.net
ValuES is coordinated by the Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and
implemented in partnership with the Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research
(UFZ) and the Conservation Strategy Fund (CSF). ValuES is a project with a global focus.
We work in close collaboration with partner countries on the integration of ecosystem
services into policy, planning and practice. ValuES is funded by the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety (BMUB)
through its International Climate Initiative (IKI).
Copyright on icons: Jan Sasse for TEEB
 ⓘ We use cookies for site personalization, analytics and advertising. You can opt out of third party cookies. More info in our privacy policy.   Got it 
 The movement is growing to protect Mexico’s native corn crops Jen Wilton and Liam Barrington-Bush 
 Saturday 25 May is a chance to say ‘no’ to genetically modified foods, with actions taking place all over the world against GM giant, Monsanto. The movement in Mexico is growing considerably, as local people are challenging the introduction of Monsanto corn in the crop’s historic birthplace, out of concern for what it could mean for traditional cultures, local diets and the biodiversity of the broader environment. 
 In late April, world renowned Indian ‘seed activist’ Vandana Shiva travelled to the southern Mexican state of Oaxaca to join a gathering of Mexican farmers, indigenous leaders and environmentalists, fighting to protect Mexico’s native corn crops against the imposition of genetically modified alternatives. 
 The group gathered for the ‘Pre-audiencia Nacional: Contaminación Transgénica del Maíz Nativo’ in the shadows of the Sierra Juárez mountain range, in response to the Mexican government’s proposal to allow the seeding of twelve million hectares of genetically modified corn. The proposal followed an initial pilot project in which Monsanto was allowed to plant GMO corn in test sites in 2009. While many local communities remain adamantly opposed to the move, extensive lobbying by Monsanto, with support from the world’s richest man, Mexican Carlos Slim, and considerable efforts by the Gates Foundation, have raised real fears that local concerns may be ignored. 
 While Slim, the Gates Foundation and Monsanto argue that GMO technology will feed the world’s poor, many locals deem the imposition of transgenic crops a serious threat to the native varieties of corn that have been at the core of rural Mexican cultures for millennia. 
 ‘On every ground transgenics are wrong,’ Vandana Shiva told the Oaxaca audience of several hundred, “but they are hugely wrong in the centre of diversity of maize here in Mexico.’ 
 Advert 
 The historic birthplace of corn, and home to several thousand varieties of the crop, corn is more than just a staple in the Mexican diet. Beyond its prevalence in local cooking, corn is a symbol at the heart of countless indigenous traditions and holds great spiritual significance. An indigenous Nahuatl man from the state of Hidalgo explained that his community hosts a festival to celebrate corn every year in which ‘we dance with the corn and we celebrate the Earth Mother.’ 
 Vandana Shiva spoke at a gathering in Oaxaca Jen Wilton and Liam Barrington-Bush 
 Echoing this sentiment, a woman from an organization representing indigenous communities in the south-east of Mexico and Guatemala said, ‘When we care for and cultivate our cornfields, God is with us. He gives us the food that we need. He works with us and he rests with us… The corn that God gives us, lives with us, sings and dances with us, and in certain moments it also cries with us.’ 
 A nationwide campaign was born in Mexico in 2007 called ‘Sin Maíz, no hay país’ (Without corn, there is no country). ‘Corn is the life of the towns,’ said event organizer Neftalí Reyes Mendez, of the Oaxacan Collective in Defence of Territories in an interview following the event. ‘Corn is the base of life, the base of resistance for the peoples of Oaxaca.’ 
 Aware of the crop’s supreme importance in Mexico, Vandana Shiva travelled more than 30 hours to share her experiences of fighting GM-giant Monsanto in India. ‘We started the seed saving movement in India,’ she explained, ‘with the commitment to not obey laws that make it illegal for us to have our own seeds, because [seed] saving for biodiversity, continuing our heritage, receiving what we have received from nature and our ancestors, looking after it with love and care to pass it on to future generations is not a crime. It is our sacred duty.’ 
 Shiva went on to explain the catastrophic effects that the widespread planting of BT cotton in India has had, relating how within one season only Monsanto seed was available to cotton farmers. Subsequent crop failures and the rise of indebtedness, following an 8,000-fold increase in seed prices, have devastated the fabric of community life. Shiva poignantly told the gathered crowd, ‘150,000 people have been killed in the criminal violence of organized crime in Mexico. In India, 270,000 Indian peasants have committed suicide because of the criminal violence of the organized crime of Monsanto. … Don’t allow Monsanto to make Mexico a suicide economy.’ 
 With what critics have called ‘The Monsanto Protection Act’ having recently passed into law in the US, some Mexicans fear Peña Nieto’s government will follow suit and approve the widespread commercial planting of GM corn, making seed sharing illegal and making it far harder for farmers to maintain non-GMO-contaminated varieties of corn. Dr Alejandro Espinosa Calderón, a nationally recognized expert on GMO corn in Mexico, echoed this fear, stating emphatically, ‘The Mexican government does not defend Mexicans, they defend Monsanto.’ 
 Advert 
 GM advocates argue that scientific tests show no harmful health or environmental results. But Shiva has heard these arguments before. ‘All the tests they do for safety are not tests, because they work with surrogate proteins. They don’t work with the transgene,’ Shiva explained. Her concern is backed up by a 2006 report by Friends of the Earth UK, on the allergenic qualities of GMO foods. The report argues ‘surrogate proteins may not reflect the toxicity or allergenicity of the plant-produced protein to which people are actually exposed… The use of surrogate proteins is not acceptable – protein produced by the GM plant that will actually be eaten must be used in allergenicity assessments.’ 
 Similarly, a 2009 report from the Indian Academy of Sciences recommends ‘carrying out acute toxicity studies with native (not “surrogate”) protein.’ 
 ‘They say this is natural,’ Shiva explains incredulously. ‘It is substantially equivalent to your corn and therefore we don’t have to really test because it is equal. … They say it is just like nature, but when it comes to owning the seed they say, “We are the creators. We made it, we are the inventers. We own it, we have the patent. It is our intellectual property.” So the same thing is new, when it comes to owning, and it is natural when it comes to shedding responsibility for the environmental, health and socio-economic impacts. I call this ontological schizophrenia.’ 
 Shiva concluded by reiterating the connection between Indian and Mexican seed activists, despite their geographical separation – ‘We are doing what you are doing and we are part of one movement that is planetary, while being deeply local. We have started a global citizen’s movement for seed freedom, to say no to transgenics, no to patents, no to Monsanto’s empire to destroy the planet, and our lives and our food systems.’ 
 This post was originally published on the Revolution is Eternal blog, crossposted with the author’s permission. 
 Help us keep this site free for all 
 New Internationalist is a lifeline for activists, campaigners and readers who value independent journalism. Please support us with a small recurring donation so we can keep it free to read online. 
 Even before the passage of the revolutionary seed law, the Guardians of the Seeds were dreaming up plans for how to organize the country along ecosocialist lines. | Photo: Quincy Saul 
 In this historic victory–arguably the biggest thing to happen in Venezuela since the death of Hugo Chavez–a movement of small farmers took on one of the largest corporations in the world, and won. 
 “Nature will always prevail,” says Angel Moreno, a campesino and leader in the National Network of Popular Agroecological Schools, as he points to the grass sprouting through the sidewalk in the mountain village of Monte Carmelo in Venezuela. “But if we’re going to fight imperialism, we need seeds.” 
 It is Oct. 29, 2015, the 10th anniversary of the Day of the Campesino seed, and over a thousand people from around the country and around the world have gathered in this humble village, described by the Agujero Negro media collective as “the ecosocialist capital of Venezuela.” 
 The people of Monte Carmelo began these gatherings in 2005, and in 2012 they hosted an international gathering from eight countries throughout Latin America. There, over multiple days of discussions and debates, they wrote the Monte Carmelo Declaration and launched the international network of the Guardians of Seeds. 
 Monte Carmelo has become a center of gravity in Venezuela for the politics and practice of a movement that calls itself ecosocialist, leading a return to the land and the transcendence of the oil economy. Most big decisions in Venezuela are decided in the capital city of Caracas, but the people of Monte Carmelo and the neighboring towns are leading the way in a movement which is all at once local, national and global–to return to the source of ancestral practices of seed saving. 
 This year the small farmers of Monte Carmelo once again took the lead in a struggle to fight back against the ongoing economic crisis through a program of grassroots action. “We’re in a profound food crisis globally,” said Ximena Gonzalez, an activist academic from the Venezuelan Institute of Scientific Investigations who like many others come to Monte Carmelo to participate and accompany this movement of seed savers. “We should take advantage of this conjuncture to put forward an integral plan of mobilization, legislation, and production.” And over the next several days, that is what happened. 
 The Guardians of Seeds 
 We live in a world where one third of all food is wasted, where industrial agriculture accounts for the lion’s share of carbon emissions, and where the genetic diversity of the whole food chain is in free-fall, all presided over by an international regime of biopiracy headed by multinational corporations like Monsanto. But not everyone is taking it sitting down. 
 The Guardians of the Seeds are the alternative, and in their struggles and celebrations they prefigure a different way of life. As over a thousand people streamed into the small town of Monte Carmelo on the morning of October 29, this vision comes to life. People from around the country bring their seeds to trade, to discuss, to learn and compare. Small children run through the crowds, as eager to trade for a new kind of seed as children in the cities to buy a new plastic toy. 
 The Guardians of the Seeds don’t see their job as just agriculture or production. There is a profound spiritual consciousness, diverse and deep, which pervades the atmosphere. “Seeds are the beginning, the force of rebirth, and the inspiration to reclaim our cultural and ancestral heritage,” said Cesar David Escalona, a young anthropologist and historian living in and studying the history of Monte Carmelo. 
 The Guardians are promoting not only another kind of agriculture, but another kind of life. “I used to live by earning money,” Daniel, a campesino from Trujillo told me. “Money puts your mind to sleep. True liberty is in the land, in protecting nature.” 
 The political framework for this vision is ecosocialism, since 2013 the official policy of the Venezuelan government. The “eco-socialist economic production model” as defined in the current six year plan, written by constituent assemblies and voted into law in 2013, is “based on a harmonious relationship between humanity and nature that guarantees the rational and optimal use of natural resources while preserving the processes and cycles of nature.” While there are ecosocialist organizations on every populated continent, each bringing the theory into unique practices, it is in places like Monte Carmelo that the political philosophy comes to life. Asking attendees what ecosocialism means to them elicits responses as diverse as the seeds themselves. 
 The people of Monte Carmelo are overwhelmingly in support of the current government of Venezuela, which since the election of Hugo Chavez in 1999 has transformed the country legally, socially and politically. But the vision of ecosocialism which emerges from Monte Carmelo is decidedly and unapologetically grassroots. Like in the Zapatista communities of Chiapas, in Monte Carmelo the people command and the government obeys. “Those who work in institutions don’t follow the lunar calendar,” said Angel Moreno, criticizing politicians, bureaucrats and academics who don’t work the land themselves. “We’re talking about the afro-descendent, Indigenous and campesino seeds, and we have to take care of them ourselves, so that the institutions don’t come and put our seeds in a refrigerator.” This is the Venezuelan revolution at its most radical. And it comes not a moment too soon. 
 Economic Crisis 
 Venezuela is currently in a severe economic crisis – so severe that the word that is used in Venezuela today is not crisis, but war. And it’s no exaggeration – the scale of the crisis requires the permanent mobilization of the whole society in order to make ends meet. 
 But in Monte Carmelo, another picture emerges of this crisis, one which again prompts us to return to the source for answers. “The economic crisis hasn’t effected us very much,” said Abigail Garcia, one of the founders of the Socialist Seedbed of Monte Carmelo: “We grow our own food; we don’t need to wait in line for mayonnaise. Most of all this crisis has provoked a change of consciousness, and that is the most important of all changes.” 
 All around Venezuela, this sentiment is on the front lines. As prices surge beyond control or comprehension, the economic war has also brought communities together into networks of solidarity and production, where people are rediscovering their roots. 
 “When a crisis comes, we fall back on our cultural, historical reserves as a people, including the actual geographic sites of exchange and trade routes,” said Livio Rangel from the National Trueke Network: “We’re not talking about anything new. Look in your roots and your ancestors.” Rangel is one of the promoters of the “Trueke” movement. Literally translated as barter, Trueke combines community organizing around basic economic needs with a political and historical education wherein communities design their own currencies and organize themselves in assembly. At a Trueke, people of all ages gather to exchange everything from seeds to books, clothing to cosmetics, and also give workshops in specific skills. 
 “Trueke is what can save us from this economic war,” Rangel continues: “It can help us to find ourselves within our socio-productive essence…When you go to the supermarket, the Other is the enemy. When you go to Trueke, the Other is a friend, a love…” In Monte Carmelo, at the height of an economic war whose casualties are measured not only by inflation but by real human lives, where people die because medicine is being hoarded, the Trueke movement suddenly seems to have become common sense. 
 Trueke 
 The economic crisis has moved Trueke to center stage of the political process, and in Monte Carmelo this common sense is common practice: People were exchanging seeds, plants, food, books, arts and crafts, ideas and practices, all without money. I spoke with Walterio Lanz, a nationally respected figure whose innovative fish-farming practices and political activism over decades have earned him strong ecosocialist credentials. “We have gone a step beyond Jesus; we don’t just teach people how to fish, we teach them how to grow and care for them.” 
 While the market system is failing, this ancient system of economics is being jump-started again. The economy of Trueke reaches back to ancestral and indigenous traditions where different ethnicities engaged in trade across and throughout bioregions. An initiative from the Ministry of Higher Education has organized workshops around the country, organized by bioegion, to implement community-university Trueke systems in every state of Venezuela. And in the context of economic crisis, Trueke is taking on the character of a street action. 
 In the town of Lagunillas, a few days before the gathering in Monte Carmelo, I attended a Trueke where seeds were given away in exchange for the commitment to plant them (with names and phone numbers collected to check in), and dozens gathered at a workshop to learn how to make soap out of used cooking oil. “This is the ancient and new call of Trueke,” said Pablo Mayayo, another leader in the national Trueke network: “Against the monotheism of money, which we worship every day, let’s learn to resolve our problems without money. Let’s take a rest from cash, and exchange with solidarity. We are re-learning how to grow food, we are apprentices to small farmers. The return to the small farm is the return to our roots. They want this revolutionary process to fall, but what’s falling is capitalism, because it doesn’t know how to sow seeds, it doesn’t know how to love.” 
 Trueke is not only grassroots economics, but also grassroots democracy; an assembly at the end of every Trueke determines how to move forward; where the next one will be, who will participate, who will take which responsibilities. While hundreds of people line up in the cities to buy soap, in the countryside a new economics and a new politics are taking place. “I think that’s the most subversive thing you can do,” Livio Rangel told me: “Make your own soap, grow your own food. Make by yourself the things thatthey are hoarding. That’s the counter-model.” 
 Monsanto Vs. Monte Carmelo 
 But how does this economy and politics take on a larger scale? How can the experience of Monte Carmelo be spread and shared throughout Venezuela in the context of a rentier petroleum economy that imports the majority of its food? And how can it be mobilized to fight against the spread of corporate industrial agriculture, which has already begun to bring the chemical pesticides, fertilizers and hybrid and genetically modified seeds into the country? 
 In 2013, a seed law that would have opened a legal loophole for the importation of genetically modified seeds almost passed the Venezuelan legislature. Since the constituent assembly in 1999 when Venezuelans rewrote their constitution, the Venezuelan people have taken an active and leading role in writing and refining new laws to support their movements. So in 2013, the movement was ready – it blocked the passage of this law, and began a three-year process of writing a new seed law. This one would be written from the bottom up, through assemblies and workshops held across the country. 
 The struggle for a new seed law was the subtext of this year’s gathering in Monte Carmelo. With parliamentary elections coming up that December, it was widely perceived that the movement needed to act quickly to pass the People’s Seed Law, which by October had achieved consensus in assemblies throughout the country. 
 Tensions were high. One woman in an assembly reminded the crowd: “If the bad seed law is approved, we will all be converted into criminals – everyone who grows and guards ancestral seeds.” As far-fetched as it sounds, laws have criminalized seed saving around the world. The United States is an instructive example, where the federal government has persecuted and shut down seed banks across the country. 
 So in the midst of debates on October 30, the assembly decided that they would convoke a march to Caracas where they would rally outside the national assembly and demand that the people’s seed law be passed. And so it was. At the end of November, the outgoing national assembly voted into law a revolutionary seed law written by small farmers. It outlaws not only any GMO seeds, but also prohibits all forms of patent and intellectual property rights on seeds. And because small farmers know that laws on paper by themselves don’t necessarily change things, the law also stipulates that the government is responsible for helping to promote an alternative sustainable agro-ecological model throughout the country. 
 In this historic victory – arguably the biggest thing to happen in Venezuela since the death of Hugo Chavez – a movement of small farmers took on one of the largest corporations in the world, and won. And yet they remain humble. “We’re not at the head or the first of anything, we’re not on the top of a pyramid,” said Alan Soto Lopez, an artisan and activist who accompanies this movement. Walterio Lanz echoed: “We’re just doing what history is pushing us towards.” 
 “Plan de Siembra” 
 Even before the passage of the revolutionary seed law, the Guardians of the Seeds were dreaming up plans for how to organize the country along ecosocialist lines. On October 30, after the Day of the Campesino Seed, a coalition of academics and farmers, young activists and veteran organizers gathered in Monte Carmelo to debate a plan to win the economic war by building an ecosocialist mode of production from the bottom up; the “Plan de Siembra,” or the Plan of Sowing. 
 “Where are we going?” a poster at the front of the room asked at the beginning of a long day of discussion and debate, and pointed towards the answers: “Toward productive and political coherence: the rescue of native varieties, the use of organic fertilizers, and the empowerment of a communal chain of production and distribution.” The plan, which was subsequently illustrated and refined throughout the day, was to sow over 60,000 acres under “the logic of the communes.” Forty thousand would be devoted to corn, to beat the monopoly on pre-cooked corn flour owned by the Polar company, directed by the counter-revolutionary agribusiness tycoon Lorenzo Mendoza. 
 While Monsanto and other proponents of the Green Revolution propose that societies like Venezuela overcome their food problems by turning to new innovations in agricultural science and technology, the Guardians of the Seeds and their allies in Monte Carmelo are pointing in precisely the opposite direction. 
 “The ancient things are the most powerful,” Mayayo explained: “They are more trustworthy than the new things, because the ancient things have already proved themselves; they have resisted capitalism for hundreds of years. They’re still here!” 
 For the whole day, the hundreds of people from around the country divided themselves into rooms organized by type of crop – beans, corn, potatoes, and so on – in order to measure the efforts of all the different communities and integrate them into a coherent whole. 
 Here in a small mountain village, small farmers were on the cutting edge of history, protagonists in debates concerning the future of the nation and the revolutionary process. 
 Gabriel Garcia, a small farmer and a leader in Monte Carmelo, emphasized that there should not be a centralized state bureaucracy which manages seeds, and that legislation should not substitute for mobilization: “Seeds can’t be in a museum. They have to be cultivated. Every day is the Day of Seeds, not just October 29. We have to believe in ourselves, or we’ll always depend on technicians from universities, and we’ll end up using heavy machinery and other inappropriate technologies.” 
 Rangel and Mayayo from the Trueke network voiced concerns that the Plan of Sowing should not devolve into centralized bureaucracies where small farmers would be once again sacrificed on the altar of industrial production. “First they kick the small farmer off the land, then they force them into a city, and now they want to accuse them of not producing enough to feed the city?” Rangel questioned: “The point is not just the seed but the farmer; to defend not just the seed but the person who defends the seed. In counting seeds we get screwed. Take the harvest to the Trueke, not to the state.” Angel Moreno also argued against the quantitative framework: “Here in this seed is our essence. It can’t be measured.” Mayayo continued, “central planning in agriculture never worked in Russia or in China. It worked in health, education, prevention of accidents, but not in economy.” Walter Lanz took it a step further, telling me later: “any solution has to break with the logic of cities. As long as we can’t break from the model of exploiting the country to feed the city, we’ll never resolve our social or ecological problems.” 
 Such radical and often spiritual perspectives are strong in Monte Carmelo, and the tensions between small farmers who insist that their production could not be measured clashed with those who were concerned that without a quantifiable plan, the movement would not be able to either pass legislation that favored their efforts, or truly coordinate them into a coherent whole capable of providing an alternative to both the current economic crisis or the industrial agriculture of the Green Revolution. The debates were not only between friends and comrades and organizations, but also included deputies and representatives of the government. 
 And yet what emerged was not a mess of contradictions, but a beautifully complex picture of solidarity and struggle. Relieving some of the high tensions after a day of debates, Moreno reminded everyone that they were together as revolutionaries. “We live conspiring. We have to be insurgents. Next year let’s come with sacks of seeds, not just little bags.” 
 Conclusion 
 The Guardians of Seeds in Monte Carmelo are returning to the source, and they are inviting the world to join them. Their program is an integrated plan of action, including mobilization, legislation, and production. It’s an uphill battle in difficult conditions, but their convictions, like their practices, are deeply rooted and not easily discouraged. 
 An international media and diplomacy war against Venezuela continues to confuse the world about what is really happening in Venezuela – to the extent where one of the more reliable news sources on the country is the corrections section of the New York Times. But the revolutionary process in Venezuela continues to make major strides. While detractors point to long lines for food, people in Venezuela are also pointing to the first anti-GMO seed law in the world, and an ecosocialist Plan of Sowing. While some claim human rights abuses, the National Human Rights Plan launched by the government for 2015-2019 is one of the most comprehensive in the world, also having been written with participation of thousands of people across the country. 
 For small farmers in Venezuela at the cutting edge of history, the future is now. What is called for both by the grassroots and also by the government, is nothing less than a new geography – where the cities don’t exploit the countryside – and a new calendar – where the seasonal and lunar cycles matter more than the electoral and business cycles. 
 Monte Carmelo doesn’t rest on its laurels. On October 31st, over fifty people from eight different countries gathered to discuss and debate “the convocation of the First Ecosocialist International.” They invite the world to join them in a return to the source, which takes us beyond the source, like the seed, which unites the soil to the sky. 
 WATCH: The Empire Files: Monsanto, America's Monster 
Pace International Law Review
Volume 30
Issue 1 Winter 2017

Article 1

December 2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples
Casandia Bellevue
Elisabeth Haub School of Law at Pace University, cbellevue@law.pace.edu

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr
Part of the Agriculture Law Commons, Food and Drug Law Commons, Human Rights Law
Commons, Indian and Aboriginal Law Commons, International Law Commons, and the
International Trade Law Commons
Recommended Citation
Casandia Bellevue, GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples, 30 Pace Int'l L. Rev. 1 (2017)
Available at: http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the School of Law at DigitalCommons@Pace. It has been accepted for inclusion in Pace
International Law Review by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@Pace. For more information, please contact cpittson@law.pace.edu.

GMOS, INTERNATIONAL LAW AND INDIGENOUS
PEOPLES
Casandia Bellevue*
ABSTRACT

This Article sprung from a desire to discover why—despite
scientific uncertainty and the oft-cited precautionary principle in
international law—genetically modified organisms are still allowed
to spread via international trade and natural ecological cycles.
While exploring this topic, it did not take long to come across the
environmental justice impacts of genetically modified crops, and
their particularly disparate impact upon indigenous peoples across
the globe. Not only are GMOs threatening biodiversity and our
planet, but also the very existence and cultural foundations of many
indigenous groups.
This Article seeks to answer the following questions: What are the
international agreements that can be used to protect indigenous
peoples against GMOs encroaching on their food security and food
sovereignty?
Why have these agreements, especially the
precautionary principle, thus far failed to restrict the spread of
GMOs, and protect the food sovereignty of indigenous peoples?
Moving forward, how can international treaties, declarations, and
conventions be enforced with regard to international GMO
promulgation?

*

Casandia Bellevue is an academic in her final year of law school at the Elisabeth
Haub School of Law at Pace University. She has long been interested in
indigenous issues, but it was not until 2016 that she began exploring the field in
the legal context and writing articles that touch on indigenous sovereignty and
environmental justice. GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples was
written under the indispensable guidance of Nicholas A. Robinson, Gilbert and
Sarah Kerlin Distinguished Professor of Environmental Law Emeritus at the
Elisabeth Haub School of Law and Co-Director of the Global Center for
Environmental Legal Studies, to whom she is eternally grateful.

1

1

2

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction .............................................................................. 3
I.Genetically Modified Organisms........................................... 4
A. The History and Science ......................................... 4
B. The Pitfalls in Science ............................................. 6
C. The Pitfalls in Implementation .............................. 11
II.Indigenous Peoples............................................................. 13
A. Indigenous Sentiment Toward IPR and GMOs..... 13
i. GMOs and Indigenous Peoples: A Native
Hawaiian Case Study ................................. 15
ii. GMOs and Indigenous Peoples: An
Amazonian Indigenous Case Study ........... 18
III.The Precautionary Principle .............................................. 23
A. U.S. and the Precautionary Principle .................... 24
B. The U.S. Pushback Against the Precautionary
Principle ................................................................ 29
IV.International Agreements Involving Rights of Indigenous
Peoples to Their Lands and Food Security .................. 31
A. Food Security and Food Sovereignty .................... 33
B. International Agreements Regarding Indigenous
Agricultural Rights ................................................ 34
C. Using International Law to Protect Indigenous
Peoples Against Infringement upon Their Rights to
Land, Health, and Food Sovereignty..................... 37
Conclusion ............................................................................. 40

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

2

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples

3

INTRODUCTION

Genetically modified organisms (“GMOs”) are a
contentious scientific and economic venture. Genetically modified
(“GM”) crops are often hailed as the food of the future, a way to
feed a growing population.1 Others, however, consider the
imperfections of GMOs to be unnerving. These organisms are
entering and altering our ecosystems in potentially problematic
ways. In 2014, The World Health Organization observed that “it is
not possible to make general statements on the safety of all GM
foods.”2 While there are still scientists and investors who insist that
GMOs are harmless and will solve the world’s food security issues,
this claim is rebuffed by many in the scientific community.3
GM crops seem to have overwhelmingly disparaging effects
on indigenous peoples and other minority groups. Indigenous
peoples have a unique tie to their lands and crops that infiltrates the
very fiber of their cultures and traditions. Moreover, GMOs threaten
plant and overall biological biodiversity by selecting and breeding
out certain traits and inserting foreign genes into organisms to
“improve” or create different traits within the organism.4 This
synthetic selection, due to the high likelihood of cross-pollination,
threatens to homogenize plant species, thereby jeopardizing the
integrity of crops crucial to many indigenous peoples throughout the
world.5 Over time, this manner of genetic selection will also serve
1

See generally Growing Better Together: Monsanto 2016 Sustainability
Report,
MONSANTO,
https://monsanto.com/app/uploads/2017/05/2016sustainability-report-2.pdf (last visited September 20, 2017) (hereinafter
MONSANTO).
2
Frequently Asked Questions on Genetically Modified Foods, WHO
(May 2014), http://www.who.int/foodsafety/areas_work/food-technology/faqgenetically-modified-food/en/ (hereinafter WHO).
3
See Jessica A. Knoblauch, New Report Finds GE Crops Don’t Increase
Yields but Do Increase Herbicide Use, EARTHJUSTICE BLOG (Nov. 1, 2016),
http://earthjustice.org/blog/2016-october/new-report-finds-ge-crops-don-tincrease-yields-but-do-increase-pesticides; see also MONSANTO, supra note 1.
4
WHO, supra note 2.
5
See What Is Happening to Agrobiodiversity?, U.N. FOOD & AGRI.
ORG., http://www.fao.org/docrep/007/y5609e/y5609e02.htm (hereinafter U.N.
FOOD & AGRI. ORG.).

3

4

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

to reduce overall global biodiversity.6 Genetic selection is not only
an issue integral to irresponsible GMO promulgation, but also an
issue of food sovereignty and security for indigenous populations
worldwide.
This Article will address these problems in four parts. Part
I will define GMOs and describe their history, biology, and the
pitfalls involved. Part II will focus on a particular sector of the
world population to be the most adversely affected by GMOs:
indigenous peoples. Within this part, indigenous’ right to food
security and traditional agricultural practices will be explored, using
a comparative study between the struggles that Native Hawaiians
and indigenous peoples of the Amazon are facing. Part III will
discuss international agreements to which the United States is a
party, and its role in the GMO discussion. This Part will focus on a
norm of international law: the precautionary principle. Though the
precautionary principle seems to give us the tools to challenge the
propagation of GMOs, it has thus far been ineffective for several
reasons discussed in Part III. Part IV will present other international
treaties, their application to indigenous peoples, and the legal
challenges that can be brought to oppose the promulgation of
GMOs. It will also briefly analyze the potential role of the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals in obtaining indigenous food
security.
I.  GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS
A.   The History and Science

The precursor to genetic modification was selective
breeding. Early on, humankind discovered ways to increase the
size, yield, and resistance of certain plants. Archaeobotanists and
paleoethnobotanists estimate selective breeding to have developed
independently in different parts of the world beginning in about
10,000 B.C.E.7 Millenniums later, driving forces in the agricultural
6

See id.
History of Agriculture, NEW WORLD ENCYCLOPEDIA,
http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/History_of_agriculture
(last
updated Oct. 26, 2015, 7:04 PM).
7

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

4

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples

5

and technological industries claim to have found ways to further
improve yield and strain resistance using technology, all in the name
of science and food security. Thus, genetically modified crops were
invented.
GM crops are created in laboratories when scientists insert
foreign genetic material into a chosen plant’s DNA to bring about a
desired change, or to enhance the plant’s existing desirable traits.8
A scientist must first identify the gene in a plant that causes the
sought-after trait.9 The subsequent step is to integrate the new
material into the recipient plant’s cells,10 a process that can currently
be achieved in a variety of ways. One method of gene incorporation,
known as the recombinant DNA method, uses biological vectors,
such as viruses or plasmids, to transmit the foreign genes into the
recipient cell’s nucleus.11 The bio-ballistics method entails using a
small metal projectile covered in the foreign genetic material, and
shooting it into the receiving organism’s cell.12 Microinjection, as
it sounds, is the method in which pores or small holes are created in
the recipient cell membrane to facilitate a foreign material’s entry,
allowing “the new genetic material [to be] injected directly into the
cell.”13 Often times, however, these insertion techniques kill the
receiving cell, or the cell does not uptake the new DNA.14 In an
effort to ensure uptake, it is common practice for scientists to insert
multiple copies of that desired foreign DNA into the recipient cell,
which, in itself, may lead to further negative repercussions.15
The uses for GMOs have been claimed to be increasing
herbicide and pesticide resistance, and controlling gene expression
of certain traits, all factors which can alter nutritional values and
reproductive cycles of the crops.16 Increasing herbicide resistance,
8

Sophia Kolehmainen, Precaution before Profits: An Overview of Issues
in Genetically Engineered Food and Crops, 20 VA. ENVTL. L.J. 267, 269 (2001).
9
Id. at 271.
10
Id.
11
Id.
12
Id.
13
Id.
14
Id.
15
Id. at 272.
16
Id. at 273.

5

6

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

however, is problematic due to its inclusion of powerful toxic
chemicals in the DNA of a plan that then enter the human food
chain.17 Previously, topical application of herbicides and pesticides
was the norm, and to an extent, a consumer could wash off the toxins
before consuming their produce. With the advent of GMOs, we can
no longer simply “wash off” these toxins; they are now imbedded in
the very DNA of our foods. This issue is especially alarming
considering that, to a certain degree, what we eat becomes part of
our own genetic material via epigenetics.18 Even more alarming is
the fact that this epigenetic concern pales in comparison to the more
serious drawbacks that are inseparable from GMOs.
B.   The Pitfalls in Science

One of the major issues with genetic editing and insertion is
the unknown, and perhaps unknowable, ways in which the alteration
causes negative gene expressions within the plants.19 It is also worth
noting that there are many environmental factors, such as toxicity,
water availability, temperature, soil quality, and species interaction
that go into the nurturing of a plant. As such, while genetic
engineering may yield desirable results in a laboratory, placing that
plant into a natural environment can have unintended and
undesirable consequences. In the natural world, there are multitudes
of variables at play that cannot be predicted or accounted for, and
results may be calamitous to ecosystem health.20
17

Eat the Peach, Not the Pesticide, CONSUMER REPORTS (Mar. 19,
2015),
https://www.consumerreports.org/cro/health/naturalhealth/pesticides/index.htm; see generally Michael C.R. Alavanja, Pesticides Use
and Exposure Extensive Worldwide, 24 REV. ENVTL. HEALTH 303, 303–05
(2009).
18
See Juan C. Celedón et al., Principles of complex trait genetic,
UPTODATE
(Dec.
5,
2012),
http://ultramedica.net/Uptodate21.6/contents/UTD.htm?10/44/10950?source=related_link
(“Epigenetic mechanisms — Epigenetic mechanisms influence the
expression of a gene without changing any DNA sequence. Such mechanisms
may be heritable or post-natal . . . . Environmental or behavioral exposures may
lead to human disease through epigenetics.”).
19
Steven H. Yoshida, The Safety of Genetically Modified Soybeans:
Evidence and Regulation, 55 FOOD & DRUG L.J. 193, 205 (2000).
20
Kolehmainen, supra note 8, at 277.

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

6

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples

7

The fact that GM seeds have herbicides and pesticides
included in their very DNA promotes the use of monocultures,
seeing as many farmers believe it would be much easier and more
profitable to simply grow one type of crop at a time.21 Having
pesticides imbedded in the seeds leads to the belief that using the
old way of crop rotation to dissuade pests is no longer necessary, or
even obsolete. Indeed, “the majority of American farmland is
dominated by industrial agriculture—the system of chemically
intensive food production developed in the decades after World War
II, featuring enormous single-crop farms and animal production
facilities.”22 Similar patterns of agriculture have become prevalent
across the world in different regions, including Southeast Asia,
Europe, and Latin America.23 Brazil, for example, has also seen a
large boom in the practice of single-crop, genetically modified
farming.24
In actuality, monocultures leave the stands of crops even
more susceptible to any kind of change in average growing
conditions.25 A disease outbreak, variations in hydrology, an
extreme weather occurrence (i.e., climate change disturbances), or
pest invasions can wipe out acres upon acres of monocultures.26 By
contrast, genetic diversity lends to more resistant crop, seeing as it
creates a likelihood that some crops will survive a disturbance
because of slightly different genes, while others succumb due to
their inability to adapt. Not only have studies shown that
21

Industrial Agriculture: The outdated, unsustainable system that
dominates U.S. food production, UNION OF CONCERNED SCIENTISTS,
http://www.ucsusa.org/our-work/food-agriculture/our-failing-foodsystem/industrial-agriculture#.WJo3-PkrJm8 (last visited Oct. 19, 2017)
(hereinafter UNION OF CONCERNED SCIENTISTS).
22
Id.
23
Paulo Prada, Fateful Harvest: Why Brazil has a big appetite for risky
pesticides,
REUTERS
(Apr.
2,
2015,
2:50
PM),
http://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/brazil-pesticides/.
24
Id.
25
Biodiversity and Agriculture, HARV. T.H. CHAN SCH. OF PUB.
HEALTH, http://www.chge.hsph.harvard.edu/biodiversity-and-agriculture (last
visited Oct. 19, 2017).
26
Id.

7

8

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

monocultures actually attract certain pests and weeds, but the
overuse of monocultures, as well as the overuse of pesticides and
herbicides, has developed even more resistant generations of pests
and weeds.27
Monsanto—a multibillion-dollar agrochemical
biotechnology corporation leading the charge on generating and
disseminating GMOs—created a popular herbicide, Roundup,
which it marketed as an effective weed-killer.28 There was,
however, a major drawback. Roundup has bred pernicious super
weeds that are proving themselves devastating to many farming
communities.29 This new method of farming also depletes soil
nutrition, stripping the earth of the components necessary to sustain
life.30 Aside from the terrestrial repercussions, the massive amounts
of fertilizer and pesticides that are being sprayed onto these plants
end up running into our hydrological systems and, ultimately, into
our drinking water.
The most concerning threats to ecosystem health caused by
GMOs impact two interdependent aspects of nature: pollinators and
pollination. One of the most important insects in our ecosystems are
the pollinator bees. The ecosystem services they provide by simply
going about their daily routine of pollinating flowers are of
incalculable value to the food chain. GM crops, however, have
posed a massive threat to these bees. The heavy use of GM crops
also entails the heavy use of pesticides, insecticides, and herbicides.
Corn, the crop using up most of North America’s farming land, is a
perfect example.31 Almost all of the corn planted in the United
States is sprayed with neonicotinoid insecticide.32 This particular

27

UNION OF CONCERNED SCIENTISTS, supra note 21.
Id.
29
Id.
30
Id.
31
Christian H. Krupke et al., Multiple Routes of Pesticide Exposure for
Honey Bees Living Near Agricultural Fields, 7 PUB. LIBR. SCI. ONE 1, 1 (2012).
32
Id.
28

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

8

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples

9

insecticide has been studied extensively and has shown to have links
to bee deaths and causing bee colonies to collapse.33
The pollen itself is a bee’s primary protein source, which
nurse-bees customarily feed to larvae.34 The introduction of
pesticide-infected pollen to developing larvae can be fatal, and has
the potential to destroy a new generation of bees and increase the
possibility of colony collapse.35 In a study conducted in 2012 by
Krupke and fellow scientists, it was discovered that “the amount of
the insecticide found in and around corn fields is near the range
known to kill honey bees, and dead bees collected near treated fields
contained insecticide residues.”36
Another devastating effect of insecticides was witnessed
long before scientists began noticing their effects on bees. After
World
War
II,
bald
eagles
fell
victim
to  
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (“DDT”) poisoning, which
weakened their egg shells to the point that they could not sustain
life.37 At the time, DDT was being sprayed indiscriminately to
control the mosquito population. DDT dealt a severe blow to the
population of the bald eagle and, before protective measures were
implemented, the United States (“U.S.”) faced the possibility that it
33

Doug Gurian-Sherman, Genetically Engineered Crops in the Real
World – Bt Corn, Insecticide Use, and Honey Bees, UNION OF CONCERNED
SCIENTISTS BLOG (Jan. 10, 2012, 6:01 PM), http://blog.ucsusa.org/doug-guriansherman/genetically-engineered-crops-in-the-real-world-bt-corn-insecticide-useand-honeybees-2?_ga=1.8938800.446030725.1486320825; see also Krupke et
al., supra note 31, at 2-3. France has taken measures to phase out the use of
neonicotinoid pesticides by 2018 in order to protect bee populations. In general,
the EU has imposed restrictions on the use of neonicotinoids, but not an outright
ban. See Beyond Pesticides, France on Track to Ban All Neonicotinoid Pesticides
by
2018,
ORGANIC
CONSUMERS
ASS’N
(July
1,
2016),
https://www.organicconsumers.org/news/france-track-ban-all-neonicotinoidpesticides-2018.
34
Krupke et al., supra note 31, at 5.
35
Id.
36
Gurian-Sherman, supra note 33; see also Krupke et al., supra note 31,
at 2.
37
Bald Eagle Fact Sheet: Natural History, Ecology and History of
Recovery,
U.S.
FISH
&
WILDLIFE
SERV.
(2007),
https://www.fws.gov/midwest/Eagle/recovery/biologue.html.

9

10

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

could very well lose its symbol of freedom.38 While the bald eagle
was an easy mascot to rally behind, bees are arguably an even more
important species that face a very similar danger due to the
agricultural biotech forces, yet no significant action has been taken
within the U.S. to save these keystone species.
Aside from the ecosystem threat of losing our pollinators,
there is also the threat from pollination itself. While we need our
pollinators, such as bees and butterflies, to continue supporting
farms and other plant fertilization functions in the larger ecosystem,
cross-pollination is posing a problem to those who want nothing to
do with GM crops. Organic, non-GMO farmers are finding it
impossible to keep their crops from being pollinated with GM crop
pollen due to both the movement of pollinators and wind carrying
Cross-pollination is
pollen from neighboring GM farms.39
especially dangerous to wild flora in that the aggressive tendency
for GM plants to homogenize will eventually spread to wild plants
and reduce biodiversity in ecosystems at large. This phenomenon
has already led to instances of hybridization and homogenization of
plants, which leads to a loss of overall biodiversity.40 A study done
by the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations
discovered that “[s]ince the 1900s, some 75 percent of plant genetic
diversity has been lost as farmers worldwide have left their multiple
local varieties and landraces for genetically uniform, high-yielding
varieties.”41
The creation of genetically engineered crops not only affects
the ecosystem, but also poses a threat to the human anatomy. It is
difficult (and often unethical) to test on human subjects. This
difficulty is partly attributed to the many variables humans interact
with on a daily basis that interfere with consistent or reliable results.
The effects of GMOs have been studied using other mammals,
38
39

INC.).

Id.
Documentary: FOOD, INC. (Robert Kenner, 2008) (hereinafter FOOD,

40

Maria Alice Garcia & Miguel A. Altieri, Transgenic Crops:
Implications for Biodiversity and Sustainable Agriculture, 25 BULL. SCI., TECH.
& SOC’Y 337, 339 (2005).
41
U.N. FOOD & AGRIC. ORG., supra note 5.

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

10

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 11

however, and have yielded some worrisome results. A 1999 study
on the effects of GMOs showed that rats fed genetically altered
potatoes exhibited immunodeficiency and stunted growth.42
Another study conducted by researchers for the University of
Nebraska’s Department of Food Science and Technology, along
with Pioneer Hi-Bred International and the University of WisconsinMadison, found a link between individuals with brazil nut allergies
and allergies to GM soybeans.43 The nutritional value of soybeans
is often enhanced by inserting brazil nut proteins into the soybean
DNA.44 Thus, by association, those with existing allergies to brazil
nuts could also develop allergies to GM soybeans.45
An
Environmental Defense Fund senior scientist, Dr. Rebecca
Goldburgh, commented: “Since genetic engineers mix genes from a
wide array of species, other genetically engineered foods may cause
similar health problems. People who are allergic to one type of food
may suddenly find they are allergic to many more.”46 GM food
providers do not disclose what foreign DNA is used, so those who
have secondary allergies will be left blindly picking food off store
shelves, unaware of potential dangers. Humankind has made
numerous scientific discoveries that set us apart as a species.
Nonetheless, we would be mistaken to believe that we are not part
of the ecosystem, or that what we consume from it will not deeply
affect us.
C.   The Pitfalls in Implementation

There is a major gap between the power and influence of
agricultural biotech monopolies, such as Monsanto, and the
resources available to consumers and small farmers. These agrobiotech companies modify a wide variety of organisms, patent them,
42

Kolehmainen, supra note 8, at 276 (citing Martin Enserink,
Preliminary Data Touch Off Genetic Food Fight, 283 SCI. 1094 (1999)).
43
Julie A. Nordlee et al., Identification of a Brazil-Nut Allergen in
Transgenic Soybeans, 334 NEW ENG. J. MED. 688, 688 (1996).
44
Id.
45
Id.; Warren E. Leary, Genetic Engineering of Crops Can Spread
Allergies,
Study
Shows,
N.Y.
TIMES
(Mar.
14,
1996),
http://www.nytimes.com/1996/03/14/us/genetic-engineering-of-crops-canspread-allergies-study-shows.html.
46
Leary, supra note 45.

11

12

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

and sell them to farmers and industries under the guise and
protection of intellectual property rights, also known as IPRs.
Regardless of who purchases the GMOs, these companies still
“own” the seeds.47 The disparity between patent-holders and
farmers has created a situation in which these corporations are given
free reign over the agricultural sector, threatening the viability and
way of life of small farmers. The financial and political influence
of these oligarchic corporations is astounding.48 There have been
reports of these corporations using intimidation and scare tactics on
small farmers who save seeds, an activity that is considered in
violation of the companies’ patents.49 There have also been reports
of Monsanto testing the seeds of organic farmers to ensure those
farmers’ seeds have not been cross-contaminated by Monsanto
seeds, in which case Monsanto could press charges under its
patents.50 In the case that this does occur, Monsanto puts the onus
on the farmer to prove that he or she is not in violation of its
patents.51 In addition, Monsanto is known to drag out attempts at
in-court litigation by, or against, small farmers.52 The wealth of
these companies gives them the ability to outlast the limited funding
of the average farmer until she or he is forced to settle or drop the
case entirely.53
The power dynamic between large agri-tech businesses and
the average small farmer and consumer is startling. While most
small farmers are negatively affected, the imbalance of power is
47

FOOD, INC., supra note 39.
A Bayer-Monsanto merger would consolidate the market even further,
especially considering two other mergers—Dow-DuPont and SyngentaChemChina—are also being negotiated. This would allow these companies an
almost complete monopoly of the agri-biotech market in the U.S. It also means
that Monsanto stocks, and therefore its political influence, is bound to skyrocket.
See Dana Varinsky, Trump could approve a giant merger that’s scaring American
farmers,
BUSINESS
INSIDER
(Feb.
5,
2017),
http://nordic.businessinsider.com/bayer-monsanto-merger-trump-farmersworried-2017-2/.
49
FOOD, INC., supra note 39.
50
Id.
51
Id.
52
Id.
53
Id.
48

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

12

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 13

even more skewed between indigenous peoples and these agri-tech
corporations. The history of disenfranchisement and political
subjugation of indigenous interests in most nations across the world
has put these populations in a significantly more disadvantaged
position.54
II.  

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES

A.   Indigenous Sentiment Toward IPR and GMOs

The proliferation of GM crops is not only a concern for
farmers and informed consumers, but it is also most certainly an
indigenous issue. Undoubtedly, other minorities have also borne the
brunt of GM proliferation and its associated practices. However, the
effect of these factors on indigenous peoples, and the role of
indigenous peoples in the pushback against GMOs, is often
overlooked. Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, former Chairperson of the
United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, succinctly
described this relationship when she wrote: “The appropriation of
indigenous knowledge on plants and plant uses, along with the
destruction of indigenous sustainable resource management and
agro-forestry practices, is also facilitated by biotechnology.”55
In indigenous communities across the world, the overall
sentiment toward GMOs and intellectual property patents is a

54

See G.A. Res. 61/295, United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples pmbl. (Sept. 13, 2007) (“Concerned that indigenous peoples
have suffered from historic injustices as a result of, inter alia, their colonization
and dispossession of their lands, territories and resources, thus preventing them
from exercising, in particular, their right to development in accordance with their
own needs and interests.”); see generally Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, Genetic
Engineering, Biosafety and Indigenous Peoples, in BIOSAFETY FIRST - HOLISTIC
APPROACHES TO RISK AND UNCERTAINTY IN GENETIC ENGINEERING AND
GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS 303, 304-06 (Terje Traavik and Lim Li
Ching eds., 2007).
55
Tauli-Corpuz, supra note 54, at 312.

13

14

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

negative one.56 The idea that a person can reduce a complex lifeform to a set of trademark genes to be controlled in labs away from
a natural growing environment is abhorrent to most people who
share a deeper connection to the earth, both ancestrally and
spiritually.57 This type of manipulation also serves to set humans
further apart from nature, which can lead us into an illusion that we
know best and can “beat nature” at its own gene selection process
that it has been refining for millennia. For indigenous peoples,
GMOs pose a particular threat to the very foundation of many tribes.
Not only is it a health issue, but it is also a sovereignty issue. Former
Chairperson Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, who also happens to be an
indigenous leader from the Kankanaey Igorot people of the
Cordillera Region in the Philippines, had this to say on the
intersection of sovereignty and biotechnology:
We indigenous peoples all agree that
the protection of biodiversity and
cultural
diversity
cannot
be
effectively guaranteed if our rights to
our ancestral territories are not
recognized and respected. Therefore,
protests against biotechnology cannot
be separated from the call for the
recognition and respect of indigenous
peoples’ rights to territories, right to
own their lands and resources,
including genetic resources, and the
right to their intellectual and cultural
heritage.58
What makes indigenous peoples such valuable leaders in the
battle against homogenizing wildlife is that they have never truly
lost their connection to nature. Their deep respect for Mother Earth,
56

See id. at 309; see Global Struggle, Native Americans Denounce
Genetically Engineered Foods, NW RESISTANCE AGAINST GENETIC
ENGINEERING (2002), http://nwrage.org/content/native-americans-denouncegenetically-engineered-foods.
57
Tauli-Corpuz, supra note 54, at 309-10.
58
Id. at 320-21.

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

14

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 15

Gaia, the Corn Mother—however one may call it—is so entrenched
in their cultures that they are much warier about altering life-forms
and the effects it may have on the web of life. In other words,
aspects of the precautionary principle are built into their belief
systems and culture. The following examples from Hawai’i and
Brazil explore this deeper connection.
i.  

GMOs and Indigenous Peoples: A Native Hawaiian Case
Study

Currently, a major battleground on the issue of GMOs
involves an archipelago in the middle of the Pacific Ocean that is
home to an abundance of biodiversity and rich indigenous culture:
Hawai’i. Due to its lush soil and tropical climate, the Hawaiian
Islands are seen by many as fertile ground for agriculture. At the
moment, Hawai’i has the largest number of experimental GM crop
trials than any state in the U.S., and hospital records are reflecting
that fact.59 On O‘ahu, Maui, Moloka‘i, and Kaua‘i alone, GM crops
take up about 23,728 acres of arable land.60 As a result, there has
been a rise in reports of increased asthma in children and
hospitalization of school children near GM farms—and even
workers from the GM fields—due to pesticide exposure.61 In 2006,
60 students and a number of teachers from Waimea Canyon Middle
School complained of “headache[s], dizziness, nausea, or vomiting”
after a regular spray operation of a nearby Syngenta Seeds,
Incorporated GM field.62 Reports indicate that “[a]t least 10
59

Jessica Knoblauch, Pesticides in Paradise, EARTHJUSTICE
QUARTERLY MAGAZINE, Spring 2015.
60
Letter from Earthjustice In Re Complaint Under Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000d, 40 C.F.R. Part 7, and 7 C.F.R. Part 15 to
Lilian Dorka, Acting Director, Off. of C.R., Joe Leonard, Assistant Secretary, Off.
of the Assistant Secretary for C.R., and Daria Neal, Deputy Chief, Fed.
Coordination and Compliance Section – C.R. Div. 5 (Sept. 14, 2016) (on file with
author) (hereinafter Letter from Earthjustice to Lilian Dorka).
61
Knoblauch, supra note 59; see also Letter from Earthjustice to Lilian
Dorka, supra note 60, at 8 (“[O]n January 20, 2016, fieldworkers for Syngenta
Seeds, Inc. were exposed to pesticides and taken to Kaua‘i Veterans Memorial
Hospital. The fieldworkers walked onto a field that had been sprayed with the
neurotoxic organophosphate pesticide chlorpyrifos.”).
62
Letter from Earthjustice to Lilian Dorka, supra note 60, at 9.

15

16

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

children were treated at an emergency room, several were put on a
nebulizer to relieve respiratory distress, and one was given an antivomiting medication intravenously.”63 A similar incident occurred
in Brazil that resulted in the hospitalization of over 30 children and
schoolteachers in 2013.64 Respiratory distress, vomiting, and
headaches, however, are just mild side effects. Exposure to
pesticides in utero could result in developmental deficiencies
causing children to be born premature, underweight, with an
abnormal central nervous system, cleft pallet, decreased intelligence
quotient (“IQ”), attention deficit disorder (“ADD”), limb defects,
and so on.65 Other side effects include a higher risk of developing
brain tumors and leukemia, as well as reduced sperm count in
males.66
Most concerning, however, is how these GM fields are
having a disproportionately negative impact on Native Hawaiians.
A majority of Hawai’i’s GM produce, requiring intense pesticide
usage, is grown in areas with higher-than-average populations of
indigenous Hawaiians.67 Malia Chun, a Native Hawaiian, Kekaha
resident, and member of The MOM Hui, a grassroots organization,
said during an interview:

63

Id.
Prada, supra note 23.
65
Joint Fact Finding Study Group, Appendix 2: Attachment 5: Human
Health, in PESTICIDE USE BY LARGE AGRIBUSINESS ON KAUA‘I 146, 242-44
(2016).
66
Id. at 244, 246.
67
Letter from Earthjustice to Lilian Dorka, supra note 60, at 23 (“HDOA
and ADC’s discriminatory actions and inactions with respect to pesticides and the
resulting adverse impacts disproportionally harm Native Hawaiians in West
Kaua‘i and on Moloka‘i. The majority of the state’s pesticide-intensive production
occurs in these particular regions, which are also home to large populations of
Native Hawaiians. Kaua‘i bears the burden of more than half of the state’s seed
production (56% or 13,299 of 23,728 acres), and the great majority (78.1%) of
this production is found on the West Side in the Kekaha-­‐ Waimea (5,455 acres)
and Kaumakani-Hanapepe (4,932 acres) regions. The Native Hawaiian
populations in the Kekaha-Waimea (37.2%) and Kaumakani-Hanapepe (28.8%)
regions are proportionally the second and third largest on the island and
significantly exceed the island-wide (23.9%) and statewide (21.3%)
percentages.”).
64

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

16

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 17

I live in a community that is home to
the largest population of pure blooded
Native Hawaiian, native speakers in
Hawaiʻi, what many would consider
an endangered race and a wealth of
cultural knowledge. We also happen
to be a community that is inundated
daily by exposure to industrial use
pesticides. When you consider the
danger of frequent, long-term
exposure to industrial pesticides,
some may consider this to be a form
of genocide.68
The statistics show that Ms. Chun’s sentiments are not overblown.
For example, Kaua‘i produces over half of the state’s seeds, but that
agriculture is concentrated on the West Side of the island in Kekaha
Waimea and Kaumakani Hanapepe, 5,455 and 4,932 acres
respectively.69 Those regions also contain the highest number of
Native Hawaiian residents on the island.70 As discussed, where
there is agricultural activity in Hawai’i, there is high fertilizer and
pesticide usage causing serious health concerns in the local
community—communities that often consist of an overwhelming
number of minorities. While this strategic placement may be partly
due to cheaper land prices, it is also just as likely due to the
knowledge that Native Hawaiians have less political clout than those
in affluent neighborhoods who are often of non-native decent.71

68

Mike Coots, Native Hawaiians Bring Civil Rights Complaint Against
State Agencies on Pesticide Use, EARTHJUSTICE (Sept. 14, 2016),
http://earthjustice.org/news/press/2016/native-hawaiians-bring-civil-rightscomplaint-against-state-agencies-on-pesticide-use.
69
Letter from Earthjustice to Lilian Dorka, supra note 60, at 23.
70
Id.
71
Coots, supra note 68.

17

18

PACE INT’L L. REV.
ii.  

[Vol. XXX] 1N

GMOs and Indigenous Peoples: An Amazonian Indigenous
Case Study

Another region of the world where indigenous populations
are fighting against the massive influence of agro-biotech
companies is in the Brazilian Amazon basin. The differences
between Native Hawaiians and the Amazonian indigenous,
however, are stark. The plight of indigenous peoples in the Amazon
is much more dire and goes beyond fighting for the right to health,
food security, and freedom from severe discrimination. The
Amazonian indigenous are not only fighting for their lands and their
ways of life, but also their cultures and their right to live.72
In order to fully comprehend the struggle of Amazonian
indigenous peoples against mono-cropping and genetically
modified soy, one must first analyze a brief history of Brazil’s
political structure and agriculture. Chapter VIII of the Brazilian
Constitution guarantees that indigenous peoples “shall have their
social organization, customs, languages, creeds and traditions
recognized, as well as their original rights to the lands they
traditionally occupy, it being incumbent upon the Union to
demarcate them, protect and ensure respect for all of their
property.”73 The Constitution goes on to afford “Indians” further
protections, such as the right to the resources of their tradition lands
and protections against exploitation of those lands by outsiders,
exceptions only to be granted with indigenous consent by the
National Congress.74 Other protections include safety from forced
removal and occupation, and standing to sue in their own defense.75
Although on paper these rights seem even more protective than the
American Constitution—which only mentions Native Americans
for tax and commerce purposes—in practice this chapter of the
Brazilian Constitution is largely ignored.
72

See generally VIOLENCE AGAINST INDIGENOUS PEOPLES IN BRAZIL –
2014 DATA (Patrícia Bonilha ed., Maíra Mendes Galvão trans., Missionary
Council for Indigenous People 2014).
73
CONSTITUIÇÃO FEDERAL [C.F.] [CONSTITUTION] [TEMPORARY
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS ACT] art. 67 (Braz.).
74
CONSTITUIÇÃO FEDERAL [C.F.] [CONSTITUTION] art. 231, paras. 2-6
(Braz.).
75
Id. art. 231, para. 6, art. 232 (Braz.).

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

18

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 19

For example, Article 67 of the Brazilian Temporary
Constitutional Provisions Act demanded that the government
demarcate all indigenous lands by 1993.76 By the time that deadline
arrived, the government had met only half of its demarcation
mandate.77 From 1995 to 2008, the Indigenous Lands Project, under
management of the National Indian Foundation—a government
agency—took initiative and had 106 indigenous lands demarcated
and 81 of the 106 officially registered.78 Since then, however, the
Executive Branch has been recalcitrant to demarcate indigenous
lands.79 It was not until pressure from large indigenous protests
erupted in the nation’s capital in 2015 did former Brazilian President
Dilma Rousself ratify only three of the demarcated indigenous land
areas.80 This type of tactic by the Brazilian government serves to
invalidate the basis upon which indigenous peoples, especially those
of the Amazon, can bring legal challenges for their lands.
Meanwhile, individuals and agricultural interests are traversing
indigenous lands on “repossession raids,” appropriating assets, and
committing acts of violence on indigenous peoples.81
In 2016, Global Witness (a non-governmental organization
dedicated to the intersection between human rights abuses,
76

CONSTITUIÇÃO FEDERAL [C.F.] [CONSTITUTION] [TEMPORARY
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS ACT] art. 67 (Braz.).
77
Ariel BenYishay et al., Indigenous Land Rights and Deforestation:
Evidence from the Brazilian Amazon 8 (AidData, Working Paper No. 22, 2016),
http://aiddata.org/sites/default/files/wps22_indigenous_land_rights_and_defores
tation.pdf.
78
Id.
79
Cleber César Buzatto, Demarcation shutdown, racist discourse and
fundamentalist court rulings: A trail of violence against the indigenous peoples,
in VIOLENCE AGAINST INDIGENOUS PEOPLES IN BRAZIL – 2014 DATA 11 (Patrícia
Bonilha ed., Maíra Mendes Galvão trans., Missionary Council for Indigenous
People 2014).
80
Id.; Lise Alves, Rousseff to Sign Demarcation of Indigenous Lands in
Brazil, THE RIO TIMES (Apr. 20, 2015), http://riotimesonline.com/brazilnews/rio-politics/rousseff-to-sign-demarcation-of-indigenous-lands-in-brazil/.
81
Buzatto, supra note 79, at 11; see generally GREENPEACE, EATING UP
AMAZON
(Greenpeace
Int’l
ed.,
2006),
THE
http://www.greenpeace.org/international/Global/international/planet2/report/2006/7/eating-up-the-amazon.pdf (hereinafter GREENPEACE).

19

20

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

environmental exploitation, and corruption82) named Brazil “the
world’s most dangerous country to take a stand against
environmental destruction.”83 This statement was in the wake of a
string of murders of indigenous peoples who vocalized opposition
to environmental destruction by cattle ranches as well as soy, palm
oil, and eucalyptus plantations.84 Of the indigenous territories
recognized by the Brazilian government, 98.5% are in the
Amazon.85 This leads to a situation of pure dependency between the
indigenous peoples and the Amazon forest. When they are ousted
from their ancestral homes, tribes suffer culturally, socially,
politically, and in the health of their members. Without indigenous
peoples, the Amazon loses one of its strongest protectors and most
intimate allies. In the words of Davi Kopenawa, shaman and
spokesman of the Yanomami tribe of the Amazon: “You have
schools, we don’t, but we know how to look after the forest.”86
One of the largest contributors to Amazon deforestation is
agriculture.87 While deforestation rates dropped after the Save the
Rainforest Movement began some years ago, an increase in soy
demand has, in the recent decade, contributed to a resurgence of
deforestation.88 Since early 2000, Brazil has maintained its position
as the second largest soy producer in the world, totaling today about

82

About
Us:
Mission,
GLOBAL
WITNESS,
https://www.globalwitness.org/en/about-us/ (last visited Oct. 31, 2017).
83
Press Release, Global Witness, Olympics Host Brazil Is the Most
Dangerous Country in the World for Environmental Activism (Aug. 4, 2016) (on
file with the author).
84
Id.; see also U.N. DEP’T OF INT’L ECON. & SOC. AFFAIRS, STATE OF
THE WORLD’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES, at 226, U.N. Doc. ST/ESA/328, U.N. Sales
No. 09.VI.13 (2009).
85
Brazilian
Indians,
SURVIVAL
INT’L,
http://www.survivalinternational.org/tribes/brazilian (last visited Sept. 25, 2017)
(hereinafter SURVIVAL INT’L).
86
Id.
87
Hiroko Tabuchi et al., Amazon Deforestation, Once Tamed, Comes
Roaring
Back,
N.Y.
TIMES
(Feb.
24,
2017),
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/24/business/energyenvironment/deforestation-brazil-bolivia-south-america.html.
88
Id.

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

20

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 21

86.8 million tons of soy a year.89 Its numbers are second only to the
U.S.90 Three of the biggest culprits pushing the demand for
deforested land are American agricultural giants Archer Daniels
Midland (“ADM”), Bunge, and Cargill.91
The state of Mato Grosso is the largest soybean producer in
all of Brazil.92 Part of this soy expansion is, most alarmingly,
genetically modified, presenting yet another danger to an already
sensitive region under attack.93 Approximately half of Mato
Grosso’s land mass is part of the Amazon biome.94 Due to this
geographic disposition, Mato Grosso’s territory is a biological
hotspot with over 55,000 different plant species, over 400
documented mammalian wildlife, and multiple endemic species.95
This diversity of biota, and the people who depend on it, are at risk.
In 2003, the World Wildlife Fund’s Forest Conservation
Initiative released a report in which it stated that “Mato Grosso is
leading in deforestation with the loss of 795,000 hectares in 2002.
In the last 20 years, 30 million hectares [over 74,131,614 acres] of
forest and cerrado [Brazil’s tropical savannah] have been replaced
by plantations.”96 In many instances, soy cultivation has deforested
indigenous reserves, such as the Xingú National Park,
simultaneously contaminating the earth and water sources with
pesticides and fertilizers.97 To make matters worse, aircrafts are
89

ULRIKE BICKEL & JAN MAARTEN DROS, THE IMPACTS OF SOYBEAN
CULTIVATION ON BRAZILIAN ECOSYSTEMS 4 (2003); James Karuga, 10 Countries
with Largest Soybean Production, WORLD ATLAS (last updated Apr. 25, 2017),
http://www.worldatlas.com/articles/world-leaders-in-soya-soybean-productionby-country.html.
90
Karuga, supra note 89.
91
GREENPEACE, supra note 81, at 8.
92
BICKEL & DROS, supra note 89, at 14; Press Release, Geospatial Data
Analysis Corp., GDA 2015-16 Soybean Map for Mato Grosso, Brazil (Jan. 2016)
(on file with author).
93
GREENPEACE, supra note 81, at 21.
94
BICKEL & DROS, supra note 89, at 16; GREENPEACE, supra note 81, at
13.
95
BICKEL & DROS, supra note 89, at 16.
96
Id. at 17.
97
Id.

21

22

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

used to spray pesticides indiscriminately on crop lands below.98 In
so doing, soy producers also overspray the surrounding areas and
kill beneficial insects while further contaminating waters and
destroying the economic value of organic plantations.99 All of these
factors serve to destabilize indigenous communities that rely on the
land and the genetic integrity of the crops the land yields.
GMO cultivation was banned from Brazil until 2003;
however, even before 2003, Monsanto seeds had already found their
way illegally into the southern farmlands of Piauí, Brazil.100 These
seeds were trafficked from areas of Brazil where Monsanto had been
operating plantations in Balsas, Maranhão and Barreiras, Bahia,
sans license.101 Now that the GM ban has been lifted in Brazil, soy
monocultures that quickly deplete soil fertility have taken reign, and
as soil quality decreases, farmers abandon the lands and forge
deeper into the Amazon and, consequently, into indigenous lands.102
Along with this use of GM seeds comes heavy use of pesticides,
which is especially problematic considering Brazil’s lax pesticide
regulations.103 Not only is the health of indigenous peoples
threatened by these issues, but their cultural ways of life—the
subsistence practices and seed integrity of their basic food sources—
are also at risk by the intrusion of GMOs.
Along with agriculture comes habitat fragmentation coupled
with the appropriation and occupation of indigenous lands. The
combination of these factors has had devastating effects on the
psyche of tribal people, namely youth. In response to the killing of
leaders and displacement of her tribe, the Guarani, Rosalino Ortiz,
said in a statement to Survival International: “[I]n the old days, we
were free. Now we are no longer. So our young people think there
is nothing left. They sit down and think, they lose themselves, and
then commit suicide.”104 Another member of the Guarani tribe,
98

Id. at 18.
Id.
100
Id. at 11.
101
BICKEL & DROS, supra note 89, at 11.
102
Id.; GREENPEACE, supra note 81, at 21.
103
Id.
104
SURVIVAL INT’L, supra note 85.
99

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

22

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 23

Marcos Veron, describes his attachment to the forest as: “This here
is my life, my soul. If you take the land away from me, you take my
life.”105 The illegal expansion of agricultural interests into the
Amazon cannot be discussed without simultaneously discussing
violence against indigenous peoples and the appropriation of
indigenous lands. Dispossessing these people of their traditional
lands infringes on their rights guaranteed by the Brazilian
Constitution, and leads directly to the loss of cultural diversity and,
in some cases, even tribal breakdown.106
There are numerous cases across the globe of how industrial
agriculture is driving indigenous peoples from their lands while the
practice simultaneously destroys waterways and the health of
surrounding communities. On the same token, genetically modified
organisms are posing a threat to the integrity of traditional seeds,
and therefore the sanctity of many indigenous cultural practices. A
combination of these factors, and many more, has made indigenous
peoples significantly more vulnerable to the ills of large-scale
industrial agriculture.
III.  

THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE

Behind each of the aforementioned case studies, as well as
the GM issue at large, is one influential country: the United States
(“U.S.”). Monsanto is an immensely influential and well-lobbied
American agricultural biotech company. Part of the U.S.’ economic
strategy, as is the strategy of all nations, involves protecting its

105
106

Id.
Id.

23

24

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

financial interests domestically and abroad.107 These interests
undoubtedly play a large role in American foreign policy, especially
in international agreements that the U.S. decides to acquiesce.108
Despite the best interest of the international community and
widespread international consensus against the indiscriminate
proliferation of GMOs, the U.S. has been very reluctant to join
international agreements and treaties relating to biodiversity
protection, presumably for the fear of those agri-biotech interests
being threatened.
A.   U.S. and the Precautionary Principle

The first time the precautionary principle was introduced to
international law was in 1989 with the Montreal Protocol on
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer.109 The Protocol’s very
existence was partly due to the Nobel Prize winning work on
atmospheric chemistry from scholars at the University of California
in Irvine, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge,
107

In 2000, a merger with Pharmacia & Upjohn resulted in Monsanto’s
net income increasing to $149 million. By 2013, its net income reached $2.5
billion. By 2014, the company’s market capitalization was over $66 billion. Drake
Bennett, Inside Monsanto, America's Third-Most-Hated Company, BLOOMBERG
NEWS (July 4, 2014), https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-0703/gmo-factory-monsantos-high-tech-plans-to-feed-the-world; see also Eric
Lipton, Food Industry Enlisted Academics in G.M.O. Lobbying War, Emails
Show, N.Y. TIMES, Sept. 5, 2015, at A1 (“Emails and other documents obtained
by The Times from Washington State . . . show how the opponents of genetically
modified foods have used their own creative tactics, although their spending on
lobbying and public relations amounts to a tiny fraction of that of biosciences
companies.”); see also Dana Varinsky, Trump could approve a giant merger
that’s scaring American farmers, BUSINESS INSIDER (Feb. 5, 2017),
http://www.businessinsider.com/bayer-monsanto-merger-trump-farmersworried-2017-2 (discussing how with the possibility of a Bayer-Monsanto merger
on the horizon, Monsanto’s stock prices are likely to skyrocket, as is its political
influence).
108
See Lipton, supra note 107 (“The efforts to have [academics
intervene] have helped produce important payoffs, including the approval by
federal regulators of new genetically modified seeds after academic experts
intervene with the United States Department of Agriculture on the industry’s
behalf, the emails show.”).
109
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, Jan.
1, 1989, 1522 U.N.T.S 3, 26 I.L.M. 1550.

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

24

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 25

and the Max-Planck-Institute for Chemistry in Mainz, Germany.110
A phrase nestled in the preamble of the 1989 Montreal Protocol
reads: “Noting the precautionary measures for controlling emissions
of certain chlorofluorocarbons that have already been taken at
national and regional levels . . . .”111 The concept of the
precautionary principle, however, has been traced back to Germany,
where it was known under the name “Vorsorgenprinzip.”112 This
term referred to how man-made activities could severely impact
human health.113 While the Montreal Protocol focused on ozone
depletion,114 the precautionary principle has since then been
expanded to apply to many other environmental issues. In 1992, the
Rio Declaration on the Environment and Development (“Rio
Declaration”) stated:
In order to protect the environment,
the precautionary approach shall be
widely applied by States according to
their capabilities. Where there are
threats of serious or irreversible
damage, lack of full scientific
certainty shall not be used as a reason
for
postponing
cost-effective
measures to prevent environmental
degradation.115

110

James W. Elkins, Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), NAT’L OCEANIC &
ATMOSPHERIC
ADMIN.,
https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/hats/publictn/elkins/cfcs.html (last visited June
26, 2017).
111
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, Jan.
1, 1989, 1522 U.N.T.S 3, 26 I.L.M. 1550.
112
S.M. Garcia, The Precautionary Approach to Fisheries and its
Implications for Fishery Research, Technology and Management: And Updated
Review
§
3.1,
U.N.
FAO
(June
1995),
http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/W1238E/W1238E01.htm.
113
Id.
114
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, Jan.
1, 1989, 1522 U.N.T.S 3, 26 I.L.M. 1550.
115
U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change, art. 15, May 9,
1992, S. Treaty Doc. No. 102-38, 1771 U.N.T.S. 107.

25

26

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

When applying this to GMOs, it seems that the outcome is
simple. With something as unpredictable and uncertain as GMOs,
international regulation demands that the countries party to the
Convention err on the side of caution. This would mean holding
back on GMO promulgation until “threats of serious or irreversible
damage”—such as a decrease of global biodiversity—have been
dissipated.116 The U.S. has ratified both treaties,117 which means the
U.S. is bound by their contents. However, the U.S. has
painstakingly avoided deeply entangling itself with the
precautionary principle when it comes to documents that directly
target GMOs. This can be inferred from the U.S.’ refusal to ratify
the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, a supplement to the
Convention on Biological Diversity (“CBD”), which has ties to the
Rio Declaration.118
The U.S. is the only country that has refused to ratify the
CBD, most likely in apprehension of the strong, compulsory
language.119 The CBD specifically addresses biotechnology in
Article 8, saying:

116

U.N. Conf. on Env’t & Dev., Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development, principle 15, U.N. Doc. A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I), annex I
(Aug. 12, 1992) [hereinafter Rio Declaration].
117
Id.
118
Convention on Biological Diversity: CBD List of Parties, U.N.,
https://www.cbd.int/information/parties.shtml (last visited Apr. 3, 2017).
119
Id.

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

26

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 27

Each Contracting Party shall, as far as
possible and as appropriate: . . . (g)
Establish or maintain means to
regulate, manage or control the risks
associated with the use and release of
living modified organisms resulting
from biotechnology which are likely
to have adverse environmental
impacts that could affect the
conservation and sustainable use of
biological diversity, taking also into
account the risks to human health.120
This article seems to be contrary to the national policy of the U.S.,
however, seeing as the nation continues to completely deny the risks
associated with GMOs while simultaneously exporting this
inescapable problem to other nations.
If the CBD did not make the international concern over
GMOs clear, the pursuant Protocol did. In its preamble, the
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological
Diversity (“Cartagena Protocol”) reaffirms the precautionary
approach set out in the Rio Declaration.121 The duration of the
Cartagena Protocol continues to build on the Rio Declaration,
culminating in text that restricts the transboundary movement of
“living modified organisms” without the exporting country first
notifying the importing authority of the details of the shipment as
listed in Annex I of the Cartagena Protocol.122 This is called the
advance informed agreement procedure.123 Annex I mandates the
exporter include information such as the taxonomic status, the
“[d]escription of the nucleic acid or the modification introduced, the
technique used, and the resulting characteristics of the living
modified organism,” as well as the “[r]egulatory status of the
120

Convention on Biological Diversity, art. 8(g), June 6, 1992, S. Treaty
Doc. No. 103-20, 1760 U.N.T.S. 79.
121
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological
Diversity, Jan. 29, 2000, 2226 U.N.T.S. 208 [hereinafter Cartagena Protocol].
122
Id. art. 8(1).
123
Id. art. 7.

27

28

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

organism within the state of export.”124 These are bits of
information that a nation that has strong intellectual property rights
protections, such as the U.S., may be hesitant to divulge.125 The
Cartagena Protocol defines living modified organisms as:
[A]ny living organism that possesses
a novel combination of genetic
material obtained through the use of
modern biotechnology; . . . (i)
“Modern biotechnology” means the
application of: a. In vitro nucleic acid
techniques, including recombinant
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and
direct injection of nucleic acid into
cells or organelles, or b. Fusion of
cells beyond the taxonomic family,
that overcome natural physiological
reproductive
or
recombination
barriers and that are not techniques
used in traditional breeding and
selection.126
Issues of liability and legal redress are discussed in a
subsequent protocol, the Nagoya–Kuala Lumpur Supplementary
Protocol on Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety (“Nagoya Protocol”), which interestingly asserts that
nations may implement the Nagoya Protocol for damages even
against non-parties.127 The Nagoya Protocol was further fortified
when it was mentioned in Sustainable Development Goal (“SDG”)
15, which reads:
124

Id. annex 1(g), (h), (m).
See The International Property Rights Index 2017, PROPERTY RIGHTS
ALLIANCE, http://internationalpropertyrightsindex.org/countries?f=ipri&o=desc,
(last visited Sept. 25, 2017) [hereinafter PROPERTY RIGHTS ALLIANCE]
(discussing intellectual property rights world rankings).
126
Cartagena Protocol, supra note 121, at art. 3(i)(a)-(b).
127
Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and
Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on
Biological Diversity, art. 3(7), Oct. 29, 2010, UNEP/CBD/COP/DEC/X/1.
[hereinafter Nagoya Protocol].
125

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

28

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 29

The global community is committed
to conserving biodiversity. Two
international agreements aim at
sharing the benefits from using
genetic resources in a fair and
equitable way. As of April 2017, 144
countries ratified the International
Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for
Food and Agriculture and 96
countries ratified the Nagoya
Protocol.128
While the U.S. is one of many countries that has not yet
ratified the Cartagena Protocol, a great majority of the international
community has.129 As with the Cartagena Protocol, the U.S. has also
refused to sign, much less ratify, the Nagoya Protocol.130 These
abstentions speak volumes of the U.S.’ resistance to preserving
biodiversity in the face of economic and scientific interests.
B.   The U.S. Pushback Against the Precautionary Principle

The terms precautionary principle and precautionary
approach are sometimes used interchangeably. However, it is
important to distinguish the slight grammatical difference seeing as
some parties, including the U.S., consider the two pointedly
different, though they address the same issues. First, the term
“approach” is perceived as more lenient than “principle,” and while
the principle may apply to the philosophical aspects, the approach is

128

U.N. Secretary-General, Progress Towards the Sustainable
Development Goals, ¶ 19, U.N. Doc. E/2017/66, (May 11, 2017).
129
List of Parties: Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, CONVENTION ON
BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY: CARTAGENA PROTOCOL LIST OF PARTIES,
https://www.cbd.int/information/parties.shtml#tab=1 (last visited Sept. 27, 2017).
130
List of Parties: Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-Sharing,
CONVENTION
ON
BIOLOGICAL
DIVERSITY,
https://www.cbd.int/information/parties.shtml#tab=2 (last visited Sept. 27, 2017).

29

30

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

considered to be of more practical use.131 Another reason as to why
the approach may seem more appealing to certain nations is because
it “considers explicitly the social and economic implications” of
implementation, often balancing the interests of future generations
against the payoff for current generations.132 The U.S. has agreed
to recognize the precautionary approach only as a “general principle
of international law,” but the U.S.’ position is that of a small
minority. Most major environmental agreements now contain
precautionary principle language.
Moreover, established
international organizations, such as the World Health Organization
and the Food and Agricultural Organization, have explicitly released
publications stating that the precautionary principle is necessary
under conditions of uncertainty.133
When comparing the U.S.’ domestic policy with its
resistance to the international concept of the precautionary principle,
however, one cannot help but wonder about the inconsistencies.
Domestically, the U.S. has statutes that implement the precautionary
approach, though they do not recognize it by that name. For
example, the Endangered Species Act (“ESA”) is most often
implemented to preserve key species within an ecosystem in the
hope that doing so will also preserve the complexities of these
intricate systems that go far beyond what humans have been able to
comprehend.134 Section (a)(3) of the ESA explains that “these
species of fish, wildlife, and plants are of esthetic, ecological,
educational, historical, recreational, and scientific value to the

131

S.M. Garcia, supra note 112, at § 3; see also U.N. Educ., Sci. and
Cultural Org., The Precautionary Principle 23, WORLD COMMISSION ON THE
ETHICS OF SCI. KNOWLEDGE AND TECH. (Mar. 2005), http://unesdoc.
unesco.org/images/0013/001395/139578e.pdf (hereinafter U.N. Educ., Sci. and
Cultural Org.).
132
S.M. Garcia, supra note 112, at § 3.2.
133
WHO, THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE: PROTECTING PUBLIC
HEALTH, THE ENVIRONMENT & THE FUTURE OF OUR CHILDREN 2 (Marco
Martuzzi and Joel A. Tickner eds., 2004); see U.N. Educ., Sci. and Cultural Org.,
supra note 131.
134
See JOAKIM ZANDER, THE APPLICATION OF THE PRECAUTIONARY
PRINCIPLE IN PRACTICE: COMPARATIVE DIMENSIONS 269 (Cambridge Univ. Press
2010).

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

30

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 31

Nation and its people.”135 However, the extent of the ecological or
scientific value of various endangered species is often unknown, and
perhaps even unknowable. This makes the purpose of the ESA quite
analogous to that of the precautionary principle. Other domestic
U.S. policies that also share root in the precautionary principle
include the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act.136
These conflicting positions that the U.S. takes with regard to
the implementation of the precautionary principle are especially
concerning because of the country’s wide reach. While domestic
policies regarding other environmental concerns may be slightly
more protective, when it comes to agricultural biotechnology both
abroad and domestically, caution is thrown to the wind. In so doing,
the American policy on GMOs is endangering some of the most
vulnerable sectors of our population, namely indigenous peoples.
IV.  

INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS INVOLVING RIGHTS OF
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES TO THEIR LANDS AND FOOD SECURITY

The adoption of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (“Declaration”) by the General Assembly in 2007 was a
milestone for indigenous rights.137 The text did something novel in
that it directly addressed the adversity, discrimination, and injustice
that indigenous peoples across the globe are facing, and set down
ground rules as to how indigenous populations should be treated.138
Of these basic rules, there are many that can be used to support
claims by indigenous peoples for a right to agricultural self-

135

16 U.S.C. § 1531(a)(3) (2017).
ZANDER, supra note 134, at 270.
137
There was an astronomical amount of pushback for the Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. The very existence of the Declaration today
is due in large part to the efforts of Chief Justice and Ambassador Hilario David,
Jr., who brought the draft Declaration to the General Assembly floor for a vote in
2007. In 2008, Pace University awarded Ambassador David the Elizabeth Haub
Award for Environmental Diplomacy for his groundbreaking work in advancing
the rights of indigenous peoples. Elisabeth Haub Award for Environmental
Diplomacy, PACE LAW, http://www.law.pace.edu/elisabeth-haub-award (last
visited Sept. 27, 2017).
138
G.A. Res. 61/295, supra note 54.
136

31

32

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

determination.139 Articles 24(1) and 31(1) of the Declaration
enumerate fundamental rights that indigenous peoples have, which
include, “the right to their traditional medicines and to maintain their
health practices, including the conservation of their vital medicinal
plants, animals and minerals,” and:
[T]he right to maintain, control,
protect and develop their cultural
heritage, traditional knowledge and
traditional cultural expressions, as
well as the manifestations of their
sciences, technologies and cultures,
including human and genetic
resources,
seeds,
medicines,
knowledge of the properties of fauna
and flora, oral traditions . . . . They
also have the right to maintain,
control, protect and develop their
intellectual property over such
cultural
heritage,
traditional
knowledge, and traditional cultural
expressions.140
These enumerated rights squarely contradict the practice of
imposing GMOs on indigenous peoples, whether it be
geographically, economically, or by accidental hybridization and
cross-pollination. It is no surprise, therefore, that the U.S. was one
of four countries to oppose the Declaration.141 This opposition put
the U.S. in the company of Australia, Canada, and New Zealand—
all nations that have severely neglected their indigenous peoples

139

Id. arts. 8(2)(b), 20(1).
Id. arts. 24(1), 31(1).
141
U.N. Human Rts. Off. of the High Comm’r, Declaration on the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/IPeoples/Pages/
Declaration.aspx (last visited Sept. 27, 2017).
140

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

32

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 33

economically, educationally, and health-wise.142 They also happen
to be nations with high stakes in the IPR game.143 Since then, the
U.S. and its fellow dissenters have agreed to support the
Declaration, though their initial reluctance indicates a subtle, sociopolitical position that they are not willing to give weight to the
Declaration in making policy on matters involving indigenous
peoples and, for our purposes, GMOs.
A.   Food Security and Food Sovereignty

The introduction of GM seeds into indigenous lands is not
only changing the soil quality and the hydrology of these territories,
but also serving to replace traditional heirloom seeds.144 In doing
so, it is also changing indigenous diets, pushing often toward less
nutritious, more carbohydrate-filled foods.145 This leads to a
situation in which some indigenous populations are finding
themselves semi-food secure, albeit perhaps of imbalanced
nutritional value, but not food sovereign. Food security is obtained
“when all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to
sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and
food preferences for an active and healthy life.”146
To be food sovereign is much more complex, but essentially
it means food autonomy, and it is based on sustainable agricultural
142

Id.; U.N. DEP’T OF INT’L ECON. & SOC. AFFAIRS, STATE OF THE
WORLD’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES, at 22–23, U.N. Doc. ST/ESA/328, U.N. Sales
No. 09.VI.13 (2009) (hereinafter STATE OF THE WORLD’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES);
Hans Tammemagi, Top 5 Cities in the World with the Most Indigenous People,
INDIAN
COUNTRY
MEDIA
NETWORK
(Nov.
8,
2014),
https://indiancountrymedianetwork.com/travel/destinations/top-5-cities-in-theworld-with-the-most-indigenous-people/.
143
See PROPERTY RIGHTS ALLIANCE, supra note 125.
144
Jessie Cherofsky, Maintaining the Ways of Our Ancestors:
Indigenous Women Address Food Sovereignty, CULTURAL SURVIVAL
QUARTERLY MAGAZINE, Winter 2013; STATE OF THE WORLD’S INDIGENOUS
PEOPLES, supra note 142, at 19.
145
Cherofsky, supra note 144.
146
GUSTAVO GORDILLO & OBED MÉNDEZ JERÓNIMO, FOOD SECURITY &
SOVEREIGNTY 2 (U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization 2013),
http://www.fao.org/3/a-ax736e.pdf.

33

34

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

practices and an ability to shapes one’s own means of subsistence.147
By preventing or in any way interfering with traditional seed saving
or cultivation practices, companies are effectively depriving
indigenous peoples of their food sovereignty.148 Such is the case for
the indigenous peoples in Perú, for example, where governments
and corporations are violating their food sovereignty by nonconsensually seizing indigenous lands and planting GM seeds.149
These types of activities violate the core of the Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples, especially its Articles 8(2)(b), 20(1),
24(1), and 31(1) mentioned above, as well as many other
international agreements.
B.   International Agreements Regarding Indigenous Agricultural Rights

Most recently, in September of 2015, the United Nations
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. This
agenda set out seventeen Sustainable Development Goals (“SDGs”)
that are to “end all forms of poverty, fight inequalities and tackle
climate change, while ensuring that no one is left behind.”150
Section 2 of the SDG pertains specifically to food security and
sustainable agriculture.151 Subsection 2.3 explicitly mentions
increasing income and the agricultural productivity of indigenous
peoples.152 The following subsection, 2.4, lists various priorities,
such as ensuring that food production is not only sustainable, but
also resilient to climate change and extreme weather patterns, all
while contributing positively to soil quality.153 Subsection 2.5 sets
a 2020 goal to maintain:
[G]enetic
cultivated

diversity of seeds,
plants, farmed and

147

See id. at 3-4.
STATE OF THE WORLD’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES, supra note 142, at 1920; Cherofsky, supra note 144.
149
Cherofsky, supra note 144.
150
U.N., The Sustainable Development Agenda (Jan. 1, 2016),
http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/development-agenda/.
151
G.A. Res. 70/1, at 14-15 (Dec. 2014).
152
Id. at 15.
153
Id.
148

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

34

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 35

domesticated animals and their
related wild species, including
through soundly managed and
diversified seed and plant banks at
national, regional and international
levels, and ensure access to and fair
and equitable sharing of benefits
arising from the utilization of genetic
resources and associated traditional
knowledge
as
internationally
agreed.154
If applied as intended, Section 2 of the SDG can do wonders
for the indigenous movement to protect the integrity of
traditional seeds.
Two other agreements that can be used to protect indigenous
peoples’ rights to grow traditional seeds are the International Treaty
on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and the
Indigenous (“Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources”) and the
Convention Concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in
Independent Countries (otherwise known as “ILO No. 169”). Part
III in Article 9 of the Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources mentions
the agricultural contributions of indigenous peoples, as well as the
need for “protection of traditional knowledge relevant to plant
genetic resources for food and agriculture.”155 The troubling
language therein, however, states that these rights “rest with national
governments,” and are “subject to its national legislation.”156 So, in
both the cases of the U.S. and Brazil where indigenous’ rights to
food sovereignty are not protected on the ground, this language does
not serve to give indigenous peoples the necessary protections. In
Article 9.3, the Treaty goes on to discuss seed saving and exchange
practices, but again subjects it to national law.157
154

Id.
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture, art. 9.2(a), Nov. 3, 2001, 2400 U.N.T.S. 303 [hereinafter Treaty on
Plant Genetic Resources].
156
Id.
157
Id. art. 9.3.
155

35

36

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

The ILO No. 169 is the second agreement that can be used
to protect indigenous’ rights to land for subsistence practices.
Similar to the Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources, the ILO No. 169
starts off with recognizing the contributions of indigenous peoples
to ecological integrity.158 It then, in Articles 13 through 16,
discusses the rights of indigenous peoples to their traditional lands,
keeping in mind nomadic peoples and migrant cultivators.159 Most
importantly, the Convention mentions the right of indigenous
peoples concerning “lands not exclusively occupied by them, but to
which they have traditionally had access for their subsistence and
traditional activities.”160 This language goes a long way to cover the
subsistence practices of many tribes in the Amazon that require, for
hunting and gathering purposes, more than just the lands they
occupy daily. It would also serve to help Native Americans in the
U.S. gain and retain access to sacred sites.
At first glance, it is surprising that the U.S. ratified the
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources on December 13,
2016.161 However, the focus of the treaty overall is the sharing of
information on plant genetic resource between nations, and is not
averse to biotechnology’s involvement in the creation of these
genetic resources.162 The U.S. also ensured to make its concession
to the treaty subject to reservation that: “The United States of
America understands that Article 12.3(d) shall not be construed in a
manner that diminishes the availability or exercise of intellectual

158

Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, June 27, 1989, 28 I.L.M
1382 [hereinafter ILO No. 169].
159
Id. art. 14(1).
160
Id.
161
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture, FAO, http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/legal/docs/033se.pdf (last updated April 27, 2017) (hereinafter FAO).
162
See Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources, supra note 155, pmbl.

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

36

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 37

property rights under national laws.”163 As for the ILO No. 169, as
of April 3, 2017, only twenty-two nations have ratified the
Convention, so the U.S. is not alone in its inaction.164 Meanwhile,
it has been over a decade since the Brazilian government has ratified
both treaties, though the enforcement of both is dubious at best.165
It is likely that Brazil was in a better position to ratify ILO No. 169
than most other nations because the Convention is aligned with its
constitution aspirations, even if implementation of those aspirations
is lacking.166 Most nations, like the U.S., do not have such strong
protective language for indigenous peoples as part of their national
policy, and, therefore, have no preexisting textual basis upon which
to ratify the ILO No. 169.
C.   Using International Law to Protect Indigenous Peoples Against
Infringement upon Their Rights to Land, Health, and Food

163

Id. at 7; id. art. 12.3(d) (“Such access [to plant genetic resources for
food and agriculture within the Multilateral System] shall be provided in
accordance with the conditions below . . . (d) Recipients shall not claim any
intellectual property or other rights that limit the facilitated access to the plant
genetic resources for food and agriculture, or their genetic parts or components,
in the form received from the Multilateral System.”).
164
Int’l Labour Org. [ILO], Ratifications of C169 - Indigenous and
Tribal
Peoples
Convention,
1989
(No.
169),
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:11300:
0::NO:11300:P11300_INSTRUMENT_ID:312314:NO (last visited Oct. 22,
2017).
165
Id.; FAO, supra note 161, at 1.
166
Compare CONSTITUIÇÃO FEDERAL [C.F.] [CONSTITUTION] art. 231
paras. 2–3, 5–6, art. 232 (Braz.) (affording indigenous people further protections,
such as the right to the resources of their tradition lands, protections from forced
removal and occupation, and standing to sue in their own defense), and
CONSTITUIÇÃO FEDERAL [C.F.] [CONSTITUTION][TEMPORARY CONSTITUTIONAL
PROVISIONS ACT] art. 67 (Braz.) (guaranteeing indigenous people the right to their
cultural lands and traditions while putting the onus on the Brazilian government
to demarcate their lands), with ILO No. 169 art. 14(1), June 27, 1989, 28 I.L.M
1382 (“The rights of ownership and possession of the peoples concerned over the
lands which they traditionally occupy shall be recognized.”), and ILO No. 169
art. 14(2), June 27, 1989, 28 I.L.M 1382 (“Governments shall take steps as
necessary to identify the lands which the peoples concerned traditionally occupy,
and to guarantee effective protection of their rights of ownership and
possession.”).

37

38

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

Sovereignty

While there are multiple international agreements that
address various indigenous rights issues, the patchwork of
ratification and implementation of those agreements leaves much to
be desired. Most of the tools we need to address the problem of
indigenous food sovereignty as well as indigenous land rights and
health already exist in various international agreements. For
example, the Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples on its
own gives us a strong foundation for indigenous redress in the face
of GMO intrusions. The two most powerful rights enumerated in
the Declaration are found in Article 24(1), which discusses the right
of indigenous peoples to “the conservation of their vital medicinal
plants, animals and minerals,” and Article 31(1), which discusses
“the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their cultural
heritage, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions
. . . including human and genetic resources, seeds, medicines.”167
When used in combination with other agreements, such as ILO No.
169, which strongly supports a range of indigenous rights, the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples can be used to
oppose promulgation of GMOs on indigenous territory. With
enough creative thinking, Article 3(7) of the Nagoya Protocol may
be used against non-party states (i.e., the U.S.) by party states for
damages resulting from irresponsible GMO distribution.168
In addition to the international accords, the science behind
the unintentional proliferation of GMOs and their homogenizing
tendencies can be used as an equally important foundation upon
which to argue that GM seeds threaten the tradition seeds, ways of
life, and, therefore, the fundamental nature of many indigenous
peoples across the world. The ample evidence regarding the effects
on bees, the repercussions of excessive fertilizer use, and crosspollination are all valid arguments for proponents of indigenous
rights to attempt to extend protections even beyond indigenous
territories. The reason for such expansion would be that having GM
plantations in close enough proximity to tribal lands for cross167
168

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

G.A. Res. 61/295, supra note 54, at arts. 24(1), 31(1).
See Nagoya Protocol, supra note 127.

38

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 39

pollination to occur also infringes on the right to the integrity of their
traditional seeds.
As of 2016, all four nations who had previously voted
against adoption of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, including the U.S., have reversed their votes.169 While the
Declaration itself is not binding, its adoption by the General
Assembly lends to the creation of an international norm regarding
the treatment of indigenous peoples.170 Discussion of norms leads
us to another possible basis for legal recourse, this one involving a
principle of international jurisprudence: customary law.171 If a
customary norm, or a jus cogens, were to develop around the nonproliferation of GMOs—a scenario that seems possible if countries
continue to resist the pressure from GM nations and continue to be
vocal in their opposition—the U.S. will have to adhere to the norm
and, at the very least, suspend exportation. This scenario, however,
will be a long-forming process and may come too late to prevent any
irreversible damage to the environment and indigenous cultivation
practices. The road to this norm will likely be fraught with litigation
in international courts and result in much political backlash from
GM-proliferating nations upon proponent countries.

169

U.N. Div. for Soc. Pol’y and Dev., United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples, https://www.un.org/development/desa/
indigenouspeoples/declaration-on-the-rights-of-indigenous-peoples.html
(last
visited Apr. 4, 2017).
170
U.N. Secretary Gen. for Econ. & Soc. Aff. on FAQs: Declarations on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 2 (Aug. 2007), http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/
unpfii/documents/FAQsindigenousdeclaration.pdf (“UN Declarations are
generally not legally binding; however, they represent the dynamic development
of international legal norms and reflect the commitment of states to move in
certain directions, abiding by certain principles.”).
171
Statute of the International Court of Justice art. 38, ¶ 1(b), I.C.J. (Apr.
18, 1946), http://www.icj-cij.org/en/statute. Though the ICJ does not use the term
“customary law” per se, this is widely recognized as the article that establishes
and recognizes the importance of customary law as second only to international
conventions. See, e.g., International and Foreign Law Research: Customary Law
& General Principles, FLORIDA STATE UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF LAW RESEARCH
CENTER, http://guides.law.fsu.edu/c.php?g=84838&p=547203 (last visited Oct.
31, 2017).

39

40

PACE INT’L L. REV.

[Vol. XXX] 1N

Another jus cogens that seems to already be taking hold is
the applicability of the precautionary principle. As discussed in Part
III, the precautionary principle dates back to 1989 and has been
incorporated in many international documents since. While the U.S.
is putting full force into resisting any explicit mention in both its
domestic and international entanglements, there seems to be an
acceptance building around the principle on the international scale.
The emergence of a jus cogens around the precautionary principle
as well the fledgling norms forming around the treatment of
indigenous peoples, along with all the treaties, declarations, and
conventions discussed, gives hope for a comprehensive approach to
halting the hazardous spread of GMOs both abroad and in
indigenous communities.
CONCLUSION
From the battle of Native Hawaiians against the health risks
of pesticides to the food sovereignty and land rights of the
indigenous peoples of the Amazon and beyond, there is much yet to
be done in relation to indigenous peoples. The land- and chemicalintensive methods we use to grow food are not only hurting other
humans, but they are also harming our biosphere. In addition to our
unsustainable growing practices, we have unleashed new, hybrid
organisms upon the planet in an effort to make agriculture more
efficient and resilient. In so doing, we have essentially achieved the
opposite, endangering the food chain in the process. It is the
international community’s duty, as an entity comprised of fellow
human beings and as the consumers of the products causing these
sovereignty and human rights issues, to reinforce existing doctrine
in an even and reliable manner to minimize injustice.
Using the precautionary principle, as well as preexisting
international accords such as the Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, the Nagoya Protocol, the Treaty on Plant
Genetic Resources, and the ILO No. 169, we can challenge the
careless promulgation of GMOs not only for the sake of indigenous
peoples, but for the sake of all peoples. Davi Kopenawa, shaman of
the Yanomami Amazonian tribe, compels us to remember our
connection with the earth: “Why is it taking so long to believe that

http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pilr/vol30/iss1/1

40

2017

GMOs, International Law and Indigenous Peoples 41

if we hurt nature, we hurt ourselves? We are not watching the world
from without. We are not separate from it.”172 While indigenous
peoples may have stronger ties to the land and may live in closer
harmony with our planet, in the end we all are dependent on nature
to continue to feed and house us. We are also dependent on our
governments to work together to ensure we can continue to rely on
our food systems.

172

SURVIVAL INT’L, supra note 85.

41
 Format: audio onlyRunning time: approx. 44 min 09 sec.Summary: By now most people know that GMO stands for Genetically Modified Organisms. But how do GMOs affect us, the food we eat, and the environment? Jeffrey Smith, founder of the Institute for Responsible Technology provides a solid general overview in this interview. 
 Transcript 
 Jeffrey Smith: Hello. 
 Pinky: Hi, may I please speak with Mr. Jeffrey Smith? 
 Smith: This is he. 
 Pinky: Hi, this is Pinky, from The Pinky Show. I'd like to ask you a few things about genetically modified organisms, GMOs, if that's okay with you? 
 Smith: Sure, no problem. 
 Pinky: Okay, first of all what does it mean for an organism to be genetically modified? 
 Smith: With genetic engineering, or genetic modification, scientists take genes from one species and force them into the DNA of a different species in order to transfer a trait. So for example, there are genes from spiders that have been inserted into goat DNA in the hope that they can milk the goat to get spider web protein to make bullet-proof vests. They have genes from jellyfish put into pigs so that the pigs' noses glow in the dark. They have human genes in rice so that it produces pharmaceutical medicines. And they have genes from bacteria that produce its own pesticide, that have been transferred into corn and cotton so that every cell and every bite of the corn produces as toxic pesticide to kill insects. 
 Pinky: What kind of reasons do the advocates of GMO give regarding why it's good to be genetically modifying living things? 
 Smith: The genetically engineered foods currently on the market only have two main traits - 80% are designed to withstand doses of herbicide, they don't die when sprayed with the company's proprietary herbicide, or they're engineered to produce a pesticide. 99.9% of these crops only have these two traits. But if you listen to the rhetoric by the biotech companies, they claim that the GM foods are going to feed the world's hungry, they're going to reduce pesticides, increase yields, and increase nutrition. In reality, the average GM crop reduces yield, and the herbicide tolerant crops have resulted in about 250 million extra pounds of herbicide being sprayed on fields in the United States. It's also lost money for farmers and whole sectors and has caused the United States government to spend an extra 3-5 billion dollars per year subsidizing the prices of these crops that no one wants overseas, and that a greater number of the United States are rejecting. 
 Pinky: Okay, that's not good. What's going wrong? 
 Smith: Scientists give the false notion that genetic engineering is just an extension of natural breeding and that it's safe and predictable and even more precise than natural breeding because instead of mixing thousands of genes together through normal central reproduction, you can choose just those genes that you want and put them into a new organism. But this is a false and simplistic notion that doesn't work, and it's based on false assumptions, that genes act like Legos that you can snap them into place and that they'll function according to your instructions. The process of genetic engineering causes massive collateral damage in the DNA of the natural plant. The GM DNA can be 2-4% different mostly through mutations, unpredicted, unexpected mutations up and down the DNA, different from its natural parent. So we have this massive collateral damage, we also have the complete change in hundreds perhaps of the natural functioning genes. Let me explain. You take a gene and you insert it into say, a corn cell. Up to 5% of the genes that are naturally functioning in that corn cell might change their expression as a result of the single insertion. On top of that you have hundreds or thousands of additional mutations up and down the DNA. So this primitive technology is not something that we need, and it's not precise and it's not an advancement. 
 It's possible that someday we may be able to safely and predictably manipulate the DNA of food crops for the improved health of people and health of the environment, but that day is far away. Right now we're feeding the products of an infant science to millions of people and releasing them into the environment where they can never be recalled. In fact, because most of the basic assumptions around genetically engineered foods and the process are false, it turns out most of the experiments to try and create functioning genetically engineered crops are failures, and that selective breeding turns out to be far more effective as a tool for improving the quality of our food and agriculture. 
 Pinky: Before these corporations can start feeding people with these GM foods, don't they have to some kind of rigorous testing for safety or something like that? 
 Smith: It turns out, Pinky, that the quality and quantity of safety studies is insufficient to protect the health of the public and there's reasons for this. Back in 1992, the Food and Drug Administration was charged with creating a policy on genetically engineered foods, and they were also told by the White House to promote the biotechnology industry. And so they created a new position, the Deputy Commissioner of Policy to oversee policy development, and they gave that position to Michael Taylor, Monsanto's former attorney, who later became Monsanto's Vice President. Monsanto, of course, is the large biotech company. So while Michael Taylor was in charge, the policy came out claiming that the agency was not aware of any information showing that GM foods were significantly different from natural foods, and on that basis said absolutely no safety testing is necessary. A food company can introduce a GM crop onto the market without even telling the FDA. Seven years later, 44,000 documents that were formerly secret memos within the FDA became public due to a law suit. And it turns out that that sentence in the FDA policy claiming ignorance of difference was a lie. The overwhelming consensus among the FDA's own scientists were that GM foods were inherently unsafe, that they could create allergies, toxins, new diseases and nutritional problems. They urged their superiors to require long term studies, but were ignored. 
 So today, there are very few published peer review animal feeding studies, about two dozen, and most of the studies that are done by industry are animal production studies, which simply tell farmers that the animals will gain enough weight, etc., but they're not really safety studies. Those individuals that actually perform independent safety studies are often attacked, vilified, fired, stripped of responsibilities, forced out. I document over and over again scientists who had this treatment and how their research has shown very significant problems. One of the more recent studies for example, shows that when rats were fed genetically engineered soy beans, and then when they got pregnant two weeks later, and continued to eat the soy flours as part of their meal through pregnancy and lactation, more than half of their offspring died within three weeks, compared to only 10% death rate when the mothers ate natural non-genetically engineered soy. And this was repeated three times with similar results. And then, all of a sudden without expectation, all of the food being fed to the rats at this Russian facility started using genetically engineered soy as its base, so they couldn't do any more studies because they had no controls, but within two months, the infant mortality rate among all the rats who were now eating genetically engineered soy jumped to over 55%. If we look at similar studies on mice that were fed GM soy, we see changes in the young sperm cells, other changes in the testicle, even changes in the embryos of parents that were fed GM soy. So these are very serious problems that have been discovered in laboratory testing, but they haven't been followed up, they've been denied, overlooked, challenged, but they're not getting the normal attention that would normally result from these kinds of shocking results about our food. 
 Pinky: Isn't somebody like the Food and Drug Administration supposed to protect the American public from these kinds of food related health risks? 
 Smith: One FDA commissioner said years ago, and I'm going to paraphrase him, he says, "What bugs me is that the American people think that FDA is protecting them, but it's not". It's very common for people to think that the FDA is doing a good job in protecting us. They just approved milk and meat from cloned animals with only a handful of studies, and those were conducted by the same companies that were the cloning companies! It's the same kind of thing that happened with GMOs. Now, the biotech companies do participate in a voluntary consultation process where they give the FDA only summary data, and they typically ignore any requests for further information. There was only one biotech company that actually gave raw feeding study data to the FDA. It was the first evaluation done by the FDA. It was for a tomato that had a long ripening period, so it was a delayed ripening tomato called the Flavor Savor tomato, and first of all, it turned out that the rats that were fed the tomato refused to eat them, which should tell you something. In fact, since then, eyewitness reports from all over North America show that when given a choice, many types of animals will avoid eating genetically engineered foods including cows, pigs, geese, elk, deer, raccoons, squirrels, mice, and rats. Well they force-fed the mice, or the rats, excuse me. They force-fed the rats these tomatoes, and several developed stomach lesions and 7 out of 40 died within two weeks and were replaced in the study. 
 When you look at the FDA's own memos, they say clearly that there are safety questions that have been unanswered, and that the results do not demonstrate that there's no harm from these products, and yet the political appointees approved tomatoes nonetheless. When you look at the industry funded studies that are typically kept secret, when they're hidden, when they're given to the FDA, because they're not published, they're considered confidential business information, when we've had a chance to get our hands on them, it shows how masterfully the biotech industry has designed its studies to avoid finding problems, in their choice of the statistics, in their choice of the controls, in their design of the study, and the obsolete detection methods. They've got bad science down to a science. 
 Pinky: Are these GM tomatoes currently in our supermarkets? 
 Smith: Fortunately, those tomatoes were taken off the market back in the late 90s. There are no more genetically engineered tomatoes that are commercialized. Genetically engineered potatoes were also taken off the market in 2001. There are only seven genetically engineered food crops currently available as of early 2008, and that is soy, corn, cotton, and canola. All four are used for vegetable oil, and soy and corn derivatives are practically omnipresent in processed foods. There's also Hawaiian papaya, and a little bit of zucchini and crookneck squash. Unfortunately, the US sugar beet industry plans to introduce genetically engineered sugar as early as this year. They plan to plant it in the spring and we're hoping that we can reverse that decision by raising enough consumer awareness so that they tell the food companies that they won't eat their candies and bakery products and drinks if they use genetically modified sugar, in hopes that we can stop the planting. 
 Pinky: You mention there have been tests done recently on rats and mice showing the harmful effects of GMOs. Have there also been tests done on humans? 
 Smith: It's remarkable, Pinky, that there are no human clinical trials, and no post-marketing surveillance. There's only been one human feeding study whatsoever, and that showed an alarming fact, that the genes that were inserted into soybeans, transferred into the DNA of human gut bacteria and continued to function, producing herbicide tolerant proteins inside our intestines! Now, that means, long after you stop eating a genetically engineered crop, you may still have these foreign, genetically modified proteins produced inside you. Now, consider that there is a corn variety, or several, that actually produce pesticides, something called BT toxin in every cell because of an inserted gene. If that gene that creates this toxin transfers to our gut bacteria, it can theoretically turn our intestinal floor into living pesticide factories, possibly for the long term. Now, if you ask the government and the biotech industry "Is this toxin, which rips apart the stomachs of insects and kills them, is it unsafe for human beings"? They will say no, and they'll give you two reasons. They'll say this BT toxin has a history of safe use in agriculture, and that it doesn't interact with mammals or humans. And both of those assumptions are false. 
 BT toxin, yes, it has been used by farmers for years, but there's descriptions of as much as 500 people developing allergic-type reactions and flu-type symptoms when they were sprayed with the BT toxin in its natural bacterial form when it was used to fight gypsy moth infestation in the US and Canada. There's also animal studies that show when it's fed to mice, they develop an immune response, it's very powerful, and they damaged their intestines. Now, we see hundreds of laborers in India who pick genetically engineered cotton, which is engineered to produce this BT toxin, and just from handling the cotton, they're getting the same type of allergic reactions and flu symptoms that were reported by those who were sprayed with a spray in North America. When they allowed sheep to graze on the cotton plants after harvest, within 5-7 days of continuous grazing, 1 out of 4 sheep were dead. An estimated 10,000 sheep died in this region in 2006 with more deaths reported in 2007. 
 In the Philippines, villagers reported skin, intestinal, and respiratory reactions and fever while they were breathing in the pollen from these BT toxin creating corn that was planted next door. When the same seeds were planted in four more villages the next year, the same symptoms were reported during the time that the corn was pollinating. There are farmers there and in Germany that claim that BT corn caused deaths among their livestock, and about two dozen farmers in the US claim that BT corn varieties caused their pigs to become sterile or to give birth to bags of water. Even Monsanto's own study own BT corn show evidence of toxicity in the liver and kidneys. And so this is the toxin which is produced in every cell of corn and cotton varieties and might in theory transfer to our gut bacteria, possibly for the long term, producing this toxic pesticide inside our intestines. 
 Pinky: That's pretty scary. Given the negative consequences, how can these biotech corporations force these GMOs on people? 
 Smith: The reasons why people are pushing GMO are varied. Obviously the biotech companies make a lot of money. Monsanto is largely, gets most of its profit from their GMO and GMO related products. They sell a lot of extra herbicide that are sold as a package with the herbicide tolerant seeds. They sell genetically engineered bovine growth hormone, which is injected into cows, which is now being rejected en masse by more and more dairies in the United States. But they have a belief that this is the future of agriculture and food. In fact, Monsanto's former consultant, Arthur Anderson Consulting, back in 1999 revealed that they had asked the Monsanto executives to describe their ideal future in 15-20 years, and the executive described a world in which 100% of all commercial seeds were genetically engineered and patented. And Anderson Consulting worked backwards from that goal to create the strategy and tactics to achieve it, and they have been pushing forward and agenda based on a disinformation campaign where they try and paint a picture of these products as things that will save the world. 
 There was a Secretary of Agriculture, Dan Glickman, under Clinton, who said "What I saw generically from the pro-biotech side was the attitude that the technology was good and that it was almost immoral to say that it wasn't good because it was going to solve the problems of the human race and feed the hungry and clothe the naked and if you're against it you're Luddites, you're stupid." And that frankly, was the side our government was on. He said you felt like you were almost an alien, disloyal, by trying to present an open minded view. And the United States took this as an opportunity to increase US exports which of course backfired. We lost virtually our entire corn exports to Europe, we reduced our exports of soy, and we're paying right now through the nose because of these problems by the administrators back in 1992. 
 But the US continues to push this as if it's somehow going to turn around for them. So we have the biotech industry pushing it, and they are directly in contact with farmers as the seed dealers, and the herbicide dealers, and the funders of research. We have the US government pushing it, and we have very little coverage in the main stream media, and a lot of that is.. the lack of coverage is in part because of a design by the public relations firms from the biotech companies which sometimes includes threatening reporters and media venues so that they don't report. For example, a threatening letter from Monsanto's attorney promising dire consequences to Fox Television and Rupert Murdoch ultimately canceled the five part news series on Monsanto's bovine growth hormone that was going to link it to cancer among other things. A threatening letter from Monsanto's attorney ultimately caused the cancellation of a book that was critical of Monsanto's technology. Fears of a lawsuit from Monsanto caused a printer to shred 14,000 copies of an issue called "The Ecologist", which was based on focusing on Monsanto's products and their problems. 
 So, over and over again, we see that the mainstream media has distorted or neglected the issue and that the disinformation campaign has taken hold. So that's one reason why I'm doing what I'm doing is because I realize that the health issues and the hijacked regulatory agencies and all the rigged research need to get out to consumers, and we need to equip consumers with handy pocket guides so that they can choose non-GM because right now the FDA has refused to require that these foods are labeled because again, their purpose is to promote the biotechnology industry and they know that most people would avoid eating GM foods if they were labeled. 
 Pinky: What role do universities play in all of this? 
 Smith: In the past couple of decades, universities have set themselves up as profit-driven institutions that are very.. that carefully guard the patents that they develop and establish relationships with corporations to move forward their scientific agenda. And unfortunately, the most of the plant biotechnology that's taking place in the world is being funded, directly or indirectly, by the biotech industry. And so, a lot of the people who are in positions of science that know the risks are fearful of mentioning them because they know that they might lose their funding, and lose their job, and end their career. I've talked to scientists that have had that happen to them. In fact, one member of Parliament, who was testifying before a Royal Inquiry of Commission in New Zealand, said that a number of scientists had contacted her by phone or email and were concerned about the direction that the research was going, but felt that they could not even testify before the Royal Commission because they would be 'eased' out of their institutions. I know of another scientist who was on an independent panel during a national debate on GMOs in the UK and he was threatened that if he came down against GMOs he would have his funding removed. There's a person in 2007 who was a scientist in the university in Paris and he convened some conferences where there was discussions critical of GMOs and he lost his position at the university, lost his funding, and lost his student assistants. So, what's happening with universities is there's an incredible, um, either a deafening silence among those who know about the dangers but are fearful of coming forward, and there's also very very loud advocacy from a handful of individuals who are, in my opinion, bastardizing the science, and putting out the disinformation campaign. They are forwarding their agenda on GM crops, and forwarding their own positions. 
 Pinky: What does it mean for these corporations to be patenting genes and seeds? And, why is this different from patenting any other invention? 
 Smith: Patenting is a very contentious issue when it comes to patenting life and life forms. There's one example of a company that patented two genes that were implicated in breast cancer, and after getting that patent, they sent letters out to universities and research institutes at some point and said "Those to genes that you are researching are, we have patents for, and so if you want to do any research on those, you need to pay us money". And unfortunately this reduced the number of research studies going on about this breast cancer gene. The patenting laws are, were never really designed for seeds and the implications for seeds, and I'll tell you an example of what can happen. 
 A friend of mine who's now famous around the world, Percy Schmeiser, a Canadian canola farmer, from Saskatchewan, had planted and saved seeds of his own for more than 50 years. And when you buy a genetically engineered seed, the farmer signs a contract that they will not replant the seed the following year, but instead they'll have to go back to the same biotech company and pay the extra money for the technology fees associated with these genetically engineered seeds. So, he never bought Monsanto's seeds, never used them, but there's a two mile long road along his field where other farmers truck their canola seeds to market, and when winds come up these really fine canola seeds can blow off the trucks onto Percy's property. Likewise, the seeds or pollen from neighbors who are planting genetically engineered canola can blow onto his field. And Monsanto discovered that indeed, some of their patented genetically engineered seeds blew onto Percy's farm and that when Percy harvested his seeds one year and planted them the next year, some of that was genetically engineered. So they sued Percy Schmeiser and won, and the Canadian courts said that it didn't matter how the contamination occurred, it could be through wind, and insects, or accidentally, but because it was Monsanto's patented genetically engineered seed growing on Percy Schmeiser's field and being replanted there, that Monsanto then had rights to 100% of Percy's plants on the field. 
 And it's been an absolute disaster that Monsanto has been suing farmers for either saving seeds or contending that they've saved seeds, and they've made tons of money, about 15 million dollars from law suits and maybe 10 or 20 times that from settlements, suing and making settlements for hundreds of farmers over the last few years, and basically stripping farmers of the age-old right of saving seeds. Now what the biotech industry wants to do is introduce a technology called 'terminator' technology which will render the seeds from GM crops sterile. So you cannot replant them. And when this was developed, in part by funds from the US Department of Agriculture, it was designed, it was publicly stated that the reason for this was to target the 1.4 billion farmers in the developing world that save seeds year after year because they don't pay anything to the seed companies. And so, by creating and promoting terminator technology, it'll force them to go year after year back to the multinational corporations. But it also means that the farmers who have been saving seeds and creating all sorts of diversity in the seed bank of our food supply, if they do start going to food companies, to seed sellers for their seeds, the quality and quantity, the range of the seeds will be drastically reduced by the thousands. And so the whole genetic diversity of our food system will shrink even more than it had with the Green Revolution. And so the whole food security, which is secure because of its diversity against the possible drought, and famine, and other blights, that whole security issue will be very very serious. In fact, we'll be betting the food supply of the earth on a handful of genetics by these companies and that's one of the real dangers. 
 Pinky: Can you explain a little bit more about what is really the problem when you have a lot less biodiversity? 
 Smith: Okay, um, there are certain diseases that attack plants, and they may not attack all varieties of corn or all varieties of potato or all varieties of wheat, and there may be certain varieties that will withstand it. So, farmers may plant several different varieties in their field in hopes that if one gets attacked and hurt, the others will survive. But more than just a single farmer, the full range of farmers have that diversity available to them. Now when the whole population is being fed by just a narrow number of genetics like happened in Ireland when there was just a few types of potatoes that had taken hold, when they had the blight on the potato, then hundreds of thousands of people had no food. And so the diversity of the food supply and the diversity of the genetics within each species is important as a insurance policy against possible changes in the climate, changes in the pest patterns and other things. 
 Now, in India, before the Green Revolution, they had, you know, 250,000.. I mean, some huge number, variety of rice varieties, and then it dropped down to maybe 40 or 50 because they commercialized a certain number of rice varieties, and they can lose those other genetics forever because once they're stopped being planted, as they have been for generation after generation, they don't exist. So some of these extinct varieties could have had very special characteristics. Fortunately, there are people like Vandana Shiva in India that have rice seed banks that are saving varieties of rice and other plants. And she's pointed out that there's a red rice with high levels of vitamin A, and there's certain rice that's good for pregnant women, and there's all sorts of diversity in nature that if it had been wiped out and not preserved, we would be, we would not be the beneficiaries of nature's bounty. 
 Pinky: I've heard that there are corporations that are patenting human DNA. Do you know anything about this? 
 Smith: When I mentioned the genes that were patented that relate to breast cancer, those were human genes. About a thousand of the genes inside human beings are patented. So it's a very odd thing, that, you know, a thousand of the genes in you and me are owned, the rights to those are owned, by corporations. They basically discover the gene, discover some use for it, and on the basis of their discovery call it a kind of invention, and gain rights to it. There's also something called biopiracy where, say in India, farmers have for years worked and selected certain qualities of wheat so they end up with a wheat that creates chapatis, that's perfect for chapatis. Well then comes along a biotech company. They take samples of that, discover some of the reasons why the chapati wheat is bene.. is so unique, and then claim to patent it so that they can then sell that chapati wheat back to the Indian farmers at a profit. Here's where they're stealing the intellectual property, so to speak, of generations of farmers in India, calling it their own and then demanding a price because the legal system favors that. 
 Well, a company tried to do that with chapatis and they were stopped. They tried to do that with neem, which is a tree in India that's been used for a variety of herbal remedies, and there was a big patent fight on that, and they dismissed the patent. And there's all sorts of examples, however, where the patents are not dismissed, and not only is it co-opting the work done by generations of farmers, typically the company that does the patenting is from the United States, Canada, or Europe, and they get the crop that they're patenting or the organism that they're patenting from a developing country, but they don't give any recompense or remuneration to that developing country. So this is why it's a form of what they call biopiracy, or bioprospecting, where they steal some of the resources from these developing countries and do not give them any money, but just charge them if they want to use their own products from that point on. 
 Pinky: You know, I've heard that some people are calling for moratoriums on GMO research, testing, and patenting. What would that look like in practice and how is that protection when, um, I guess my understanding is that moratoriums are usually only temporary? 
 Smith: A lot of people would like to see the patenting of life made illegal. And the patenting of seeds made illegal. So that's one struggle which is going forward, and there's a lot of people for that in developing countries and working in the transnational organizations. A second fight is to try and get a moratorium on the planting of GMOs outdoors. Most people are not expressing a desire to end the research on genetic engineering. Most people say but if they research it, it should be indoors, in a laboratory, in a carefully constructed greenhouse, not to let genes escape into the gene pool. 
 You see the genes, unlike chemical spills, genetic engineering releases a genetic pollution that self-propagates. It spreads to non-GMO crops, to weedy relatives, and it persists in the environment. The genes that we are putting out there now can possibly outlast the effects of global warming and nuclear waste. So there's a strong desire to put the genie back in the bottle so that we aren't making irreparable changes to our ecosystem based on very little knowledge and an infant primitive science. 
 There's been a rise of efforts to create GM free zones around the world. There's 4,500 jurisdictions in Europe, large and small, which have wanted to create GM free zones. There's countries as a whole that want to ban the planting. In fact, Switzerland has a five year ban, most of Austria wants to ban it, parts of Italy want to ban it, Greece, Poland, France, and Ireland want to ban it. There's counties in California where it's illegal to plant GMOs because of ballot initiatives or ordinances by county supervisors. There are states in Australia, regions in New Zealand, countries in Africa, regions in South America where the farmers or the consumers, or the politicians have created a GM free zone, meaning it's illegal to plant genetically engineered crops in that area. Now, this is a very important, and vital, and appropriate response to genetic engineering, but in the long term it's not going to stop it because nature has a way of spreading her bounty. I mean, Hawaii was pure lava rock and now it's a lush tropical paradise, and it's more than 2000 miles away from the mainland. Where did it get those seeds? So over the long term, nature will spread it irrespective of the boundaries. 
 I was in Australia in late 2007 and popularizing the notion that genetically engineered foods are unsafe. Soon after, two states still lifted their moratorium on the planting of GMOs but the nearby states did not. So, the pollen from one state's canola, genetically modified canola is sure, and the seeds are sure to blow into the non-GM states because the canola does not recognize the law. So it's going to spread, and it's going to spread not only through pollen and insects, it'll spread through human error, and mixing up of seeds. If you go to Canada, and you even try to buy non-genetically engineered canola seeds, good luck. They took 33 bags of each different, certified, non-GM seeds, 32 of them were contaminated by at least a small amount of GM canola. 
 Pinky: Hmm. Okay, what next? Because all of this sounds very disheartening to me. Where do we go from here? 
 Smith: Fortunately, even though genetically engineered foods and crops are one of the most serious health and environmental risks we face, they're one of the easiest problems to fix. Now let's look at Europe and see what happened there. In April of 1999, Unilever, Britain's largest food manufacturer committed to remove genetically engineered ingredients from their European brands, and within a week virtually every major food company followed suit. What had happened was there was a high profile food scandal that had made it into the news there. A scientist who had worked on a UK government grant to create the ideal testing protocol to approve GMOs accidentally discovered that the process was very unsafe. His rats that were fed supposedly harmless GM potatoes developed potentially pre-cancerous cell growth, smaller brains, livers and testicles, partial atrophy of the liver, damaged immune system. He went public with his concerns and was a hero for about two days at his prestigious institute and then two phone calls were allegedly placed from the UK Prime Minister's office, forwarded through receptionists to the director of the institute. The next morning, that scientist was fired from his job after 35 years, silenced with threats of a lawsuit, his 20 member research team was disbanded, and they never implemented the protocols. Instead, a series of statements were made to try and tarnish his reputation and boost the reputation of biotechnology. 
 After seven months, he was finally able to speak due to an act of Parliament, and from the day he spoke, within a few weeks, 750 articles were circulating around Europe about the impact of genetically engineered foods on food safety. And that alone had caused the tipping point. Enough consumers in Europe had decided that they didn't want to eat genetically engineered foods, and when they decided that, the food companies realized it would be a liability to sales if they continued to use GM ingredients. So en masse, they completely stampeded away from GM ingredients. 
 However, that story of that scientist did not make it into the US press. Project Censored, a US media watchdog group described it as one of the ten most under-reported events of the year. As a consequence of the lack of coverage on the GM issue in the United States, if you ask the average American "Have you ever eaten a GM food in your life?" 60% say no, 15% say I don't know. Most people eat GM foods in every meal. So genetically engineered foods prospered in the United States on the basis of consumer ignorance, which leaves the industry very vulnerable. If some event, if some scandal, if some research were to raise the issue onto the national radar screen, it could easily be taken off the market. In fact I think if only 5% of US consumers, 15 million people were conscientiously avoiding GM ingredients in their purchases, that would be more than enough to achieve the tipping point in the US, forcing the entire food industry to remove GM ingredients. 
 We saw a tipping point that's sort of happening now with bovine growth hormone, Monsanto's genetically engineered drug, where in the past year or two more than 1/3 of all dairies in the United States have committed to remove it from all or part of their product line, as well as Publix, and Krogers, and Starbucks, and Chipotle. So we're seeing a massive stampede away from one genetically engineered product, and I believe we're going to see that stampede away from all genetically engineered products soon. In fact, my organization, the Institute for Responsible Technology, has a series of integrated campaigns designed to achieve the tipping point before the end of 2009. 
 We wanted to report very successfully that there's other organizations working with us with very powerful advances. We wanted you to know that the natural food industry as a whole is in the process of removing remaining genetically engineered ingredients from their brands, we're going to circulate a non-GMO shopping guide in all the health food stores as part of our GMO education centers, and we're working with some media to reach health conscious shoppers, to let them know about the risks of GMOs, to motivate them to make that choice to non-GM products. We're working with schools around the country and parent groups, we're working with medical organizations, many more doctors are now prescribing non-GM diets, and there's also religious organizations which are very concerned and think that GMO may really mean God move over. 
 So, we believe that through these.. work through these very receptive groups, as well as some mass media on the issue, we will achieve the tipping point. And I'd like to encourage people listening to take steps to avoid eating genetically engineered foods. You're invited to our website at responsibletechnology.org and learn how to avoid eating genetically engineered foods, by reading labels, by buying organic, by buying products that say non-GMO, by avoiding the at-risk ingredients, and there's also brand names listed on our site, on our shopping guide that you can link to where they'll tell you that those brands do not use genetically engineered foods. So simply by protecting yourself and by protecting children who are most at risk from these foods, we can change the world as it already occurred in Europe, has already occurred in the United States with rBGH. We can make it happen with genetically engineered foods. 
 Pinky: Alright, so this can be done. So, we're going to have to educate ourselves more about these issues and fight to protect our bodies and also Planet Earth. Well, thank you Mr. Smith, I appreciate you taking the time to speak with us. 
 Smith: My pleasure Pinky. It's been really fun and thank you for helping spread the word. 
 Pinky: Okay, thank you. 
 Smith: Okay. Thank you. 
 Pinky: Bye-bye. 
 Smith: Bye-bye. 
 Pinky: That was Jeffrey Smith, Executive Director of the Institute for Responsible Technology. 
 <end transcript> 
 This is a rush transcript provided for the information and convenience of the press. Accuracy is not guaranteed. Please contact us if you have questions about permissions or terms of use. 
 Credits 
 guest: Jeffrey Smith host: Pinky drawings & illustrations: Pinky titles: Pinky 
Why Many Farmers Oppose GMOs
Jack Kittredge, NOFA/Mass Policy Director

Farmers have their own reasons to be concerned about the spread of genetically modified organisms (GMOs). Genetic engineered plants do the following:
• contaminate natural plants and the environment,
• create superweeds and harm beneficial insects,
• intensify corporate concentration and ownership of seeds,
• encourage monocultures and large scale use of fossil fuels, and
• have created a two-tiered market for crops.

Pesticides and Superweeds
GMO crops are designed to emit their own pesticides (Bacillus thuringiensis, or Bt) or to be resistant to herbicide (glyphosate, also known as Roundup). Anytime specific biocides (poisons) are used in such volume,
there are risks. This is exactly what has happened with GMOs. Glyphosate has been found toxic to humans,
but the weeds it targets are developing resistance. To kill them, farmers are having to go to even more
deadly poisons like 2-4-D, or return to tillage and other labor-intensive practices, for weed control.
• Superweeds that are no longer controlled by glyphosate have spread to over 70 million acres of US farmland and now cost $1 billion per year in crop damage. (http://www.nbcnews.com/business/economy/superweeds-sproutfarmland-controversy-over-gmos-n214996)

• Glyphosate use is increasing by 25% per year in a failing effort to control superweeds by more of the
same. (http://uk.reuters.com/article/2012/10/02/us-usa-study-pesticides-idUKBRE89100X20121002)

• Many insects are beneficial for crops, providing services such as pollination and pest control. Despite
biotech company assurances, however, many of these beneficial insects are killed by Bt. Studies have shown
that green lacewings show substantial mortality when exposed to Bt, as do ladybird beetles fed aphids
reared on GMO potatoes. (http://www.psrast.org/insects.htm)
Also affected by engineered Bt are:

• monarch butterfly larvae, which are killed (http://www.news.cornell.edu/stories/1999/04/toxic-pollen-bt-corn-can-kill-monarch-butterflies)

• beneficial nematodes, whose growth and reproduction are reduced (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18068780)
• earthworms, which experience significant weight loss after a period of exposure to Bt in corn, (http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12753225)

Monocultures and Fossil Fuel

Monocultures are large plantings of a single crop. Most GMOs are planted that way to more easily spray
with glyphosate. Such plantings cause accelerated soil exhaustion, water and biodiversity loss, carbon emissions, and nutrient immobilization. Those lead to use of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides in an attempt to
revive the dead soil.
• Crop rotations, largely abandoned by industrial farms and their monocultures, typically increase yields by
20 or 30 percent, as well as improving water holding capacity of soils and reducing the need for pesticides.
(http://www.technologyreview.com/view/525931/are-gmos-worth-the-trouble/)

• The inputs used in today’s industrial farming monocultures (equipment, fertilizer, agro-chemicals) are all
based on fossil fuels. Cornell’s David Pimentel suggests that in pre-industrial times the energy spent to produce a calorie of food energy might have been 0.05 calories, for a ratio of 20 gained per 1 spent. Today, he
says, that ratio is likely 10 or more calories used to put one calorie of food energy on your plate, or a ratio of
1 gained per 10 spent. This is not sustainable. (http://bit.ly/1FWJ6HV)
• Many of these fossil fuel inputs are wasted. Less than 20% of synthetic nitrogen used in agriculture finds
its way to crops. The rest is released into the environment to pollute waterways or to fuel algae blooms.
(http://portfolio21.com/wp-content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2014/10/Portfolio-21-The-Case-Against-GMOs.pdf)

Two Tiers of Crops

Questions about the health and safety of GMO foods have resulted in many people choosing not to buy them
and have fueled the growth of non-GMO foods. The result begins to look like a food system with two tiers: a
higher, more expensive tier of organic and non-GMO foods, and a lower one of cheaper, less desirable GMO
foods.
• The US market has rejected GMO crops, paying less for them than non-GMO crops and relegating them
largely to animal feed. When crops that are used primarily for feeding humans such as rice or wheat or
potatoes have been engineered, the market has rejected them. (http://www.casinapioiv.va/content/dam/accademia/pdf/
sv125/sv125-paarlberg.pdf)

• Buyers here are paying premiums for non-GMO crops of $1 per bushel (for corn) to $2 per bushel (for
soy). The non-GMO market grew by almost 240% between 2011 and 2013, and could comprise 20% of
some commodity crops in five years.
(http://www.offthegridnews.com/how-to-2/farmers-abandoning-gmo-seeds-and-the-reason-will-surprise-you/)

Contamination
Modifying plants involves inserting genetic material (DNA) from other organisms into a seed. When the plant
grown from that seed flowers, the inserted DNA is passed in the pollen to other plants – any of which could be
natural plants growing in an adjacent field. If this happens, the seed produced by the natural plant after pollination
can contain the engineered genetic material.
Pollen is viable for hours and can travel miles during that time, given wind and weather factors. Thus no buffer
zone is practical, and a neighboring farmer can find their crop contaminated by GMOs. If that farmer is organic,
the crop is no longer saleable.
• In a 2004 pilot study, the Union of Concerned Scientists tested samples of non-GMO corn, soy and canola seed
and found low-level, but pervasive, contamination with GMO genetic material. Some 50% of the corn and soy
samples, and more than 80% of the canola samples, were contaminated with Monsanto genes. (http://www.ucsusa.org/
food_and_agriculture/our-failing-food-system/genetic-engineering/eight-ways-monsanto-fails.html)

• Antibiotic resistance genes are routinely inserted into GMOs to mark cells that have taken up the new DNA.
Health professionals are increasingly concerned that these genes are involved in horizontal transfer to bacterial
pathogens, which makes the resulting diseases untreatable. A recent study in China found the antibiotic resistance
marker gene blá, for ampicillin resistance, in all six of China’s major rivers. Sequencing confirmed that the gene is
a synthetic version derived from a lab and different from the wild type. It is the same type as the version present in
numerous GMO crops released in China commercially, or in field trials. (Chen, J.; Jin, M.; Qiu, Z.G.; Guo, C.; Chen, Z.L.; Shen,
Z.Q.; Wang, X.W.; Li, J.W. A survey of drug resistance bla genes originating from synthetic plasmid vectors in six Chinese rivers. Environ. Sci. Tech. 2012,
46, 13448–13454. Also Sirinathsinghji, E. GM antibiotic resistance in China’s rivers. Sci. Soc. 2013, 57, 6–7.)

“Coexistence”, the idea that GMO and natural or organic agriculture can coexist, is refuted by the many examples
of contamination to date. Mistakes happen, and when they involve GMOs the stakes are large.
• In the state of Washington in September, 2013, a field of non-GMO alfalfa was tested and showed positive
for GMO genes. The Chinese buyer rejected the crop. Alfalfa is the fourth most valuable crop grown in the
US. (http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/12/gm-crop-contamination-alfalfa-monsanto)
• In Oregon in the spring of 2013 a strain of unapproved GMO wheat, last trialed in 2004, was found growing on a farm. The farmer could not explain how the wheat got there and the Japanese buyer rejected
the crop. Wheat comprises an $8 billion export business for American farmers. (http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/05/31/us-wheat-control-idUSBRE94U06H20130531)

• In 2006 an unapproved variety of rice (Bayer’s Liberty Link) was found to contaminate rice fields in Arkansas, Louisana, Missouri, Mississippi and Texas. Bayer ended up settling lawsuits for a total of $750 million in damages. (http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20110701006120/en/Bayer-Pays-750-Million-Settle-Rice-Contamination)

• In 2000 Star-Link corn, a variety which had not been approved for human consumption, was found in over
300 food products in the US. The recall of Taco Bell-branded taco shells, manufactured by Kraft Foods and
sold in supermarkets, was the most publicized of the recalls. Aventis, the biotech company that had developed the corn, estimated at the time that the full recall would cost between $100 million and $1 billion.
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/StarLink_corn_recall)

Corporate Concentration
• The “Big 6” seed companies (Monsanto, DuPont, Syngenta, Bayer, Dow and BASF), through acquisitions
and cross licensing, control the vast majority of the world’s seeds. Monsanto, DuPont and Syngenta, the
largest of the 6, themselves control over half. This consolidation by biotech companies has resulted in fewer
seed varieties, higher seed costs but lower farm profits, and vigorous opposition to independent safety
research while vigorously prosecuting patent infringement suits against farmers. (https://www.morningagclips.com/
consolidation-of-the-global-seed-industry/)

• Biotech companies in this country have been replacing natural seeds with GMO seeds. The number of
available non-GMO corn seed varieties fell by 67% in the US from 2005 to 2010. But countries that ban
GMOs, such as Germany, Austria and Switzerland, have more non-GMO varieties available than in the 1990s.
(http://www.non-gmoreport.com/articles/march2013/farmers-seed-options-GMO-producing-countries.php)

• Because of this control, classical seed breeders at public universities and government agencies have fewer
opportunities to introduce exciting, low-cost, unpatented new varieties to the public. (http://www.ucsusa.org/
food_and_agriculture/our-failing-food-system/genetic-engineering/marginalizing-alternatives.html)

• GMO seeds are patented “intellectual property” and cannot legally be planted without a license from the
seed company. Hundreds of farmers who do replant these seeds have been taken to court by Monsanto and
in some cases have lost their farms as a result.
• GMO seed licenses specifically prohibit use of seeds for research, denying public agencies and university
teams the right to do safety tests. In 2009, 26 academic entomologists wrote to the US Environmental Protection Agency protesting this practice. (http://articles.latimes.com/2011/feb/13/opinion/la-oe-guriansherman-seeds-20110213)

Why do Farmers Oppose GMOs?

Farmers do not want to grow crops that are rejected by discriminating buyers and seen as inferior. Organic farmers will be put out of business if GMOs are allowed to continue to contaminate
non-GMO natural crops and seed. The requirements of GMO monocropping for extensive use of
synthetic chemicals, insecticides and fossil fuels make those crops less attractive to farmers than
crops that can be grown naturally. Corporate control of crop varieties limits farmer options and
independence. Patented, licensed seeds prevent the age-old farmer practice of improving seeds by
selection and saving.

Northeast Organic Farming Association/Massachusetts Chapter, Inc.
Through education and advocacy NOFA/Mass promotes organic agriculture
to expand the production and availability of nutritious food from living soil
for the heath of individuals, communities and the planet.

411 Sheldon Road, Barre, MA 01005 (978) 355-2853 www.nofamass.org
 Take action against corporate greed, learn new ways to reduce your impact on the planet, and learn about green products you never knew existed. 
 A win for small farmers: Chile derails 'Monsanto Law' that would privatize seeds (SOTT) 
 This month, rural women, indigenous communities, and farmers in Chile found themselves on the winning end of a long-fought battle against a bill that had come to be known by many in this country as simply, the "Monsanto Law." 
 The bill, which would have given multinational agribusiness corporations the right to patent seeds they discover, develop or modify, was withdrawn by the Chilean government now controlled by newly elected members of the center-left coalition known as the New Majority, amid concerns that the law would bring harm to the country's small and mid-sized farmers. 
 In making the announcement on March 17, new Secretary General Ximena Rincón pledged that the Chilean government will "analyze all that is known in our country and internationally about this issue in order to protect the rights of agricultural communities, small and medium-sized farmers, and the heritage of seeds in our country." 
 Rincón has been a leading voice of opposition to the bill in the Chilean government, and part of a larger alliance of approximately fifteen organizations and elected officials across the country who have been lobbying and protesting its passage since the introduction of the bill four years ago. 
 "We reject this law because it is a threat to family farms and to biodiversity," said Lucía Sepúlveda from the Alliance for a Better Quality of Life/Pesticide Action Network of Chile (RAP-AL Chile). Last August, her organization and thousands of other Chileans took to the streets of cities across the country in mass protests against the law. 
 Sepúlveda explained that the Monsanto Law - derived from the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) 1991 Act -- would allow companies to register patents for the vast majority of seeds in Chile, and require small and medium producers to pay those companies for the right to use similar seeds. This, said Sepúlveda, would create a barrier for small and medium producers to use strains of seeds that have been developed and used by farmers and indigenous communities in Chile for generations. Producers would be faced with renewing their seed rights every year for a high price, or leaving agriculture all together. 
 "We're left without farmers and without production," said Sepúlveda. 
 The steady decline of small and medium - scale agriculture is a growing problem for Chile. While the country is one of the world's most prolific fruit exporters, many Chileans complain that the main importers of their agricultural goods such as Japan and the United States, have more access to quality produce than Chileans do. Large multinational companies generally produce solely for export, whereas small and medium producers produce for the domestic market, selling their goods at local markets or ferias. 
 Alicia Muñoz, co-director of the National Association of Rural and Indigenous Women (Anamuri), visited parliament five times during the last year to convince senators to reject the law. Anamuri mobilized women across the country to take a stand for the sake of preserving "food sovereignty." She described the withdrawal of the bill as a great achievement: "All of the resistance that rural organizations, principally indigenous communities, led during these past years was a success. We were able to convey to the parliament how harmful the law would be for the indigenous communities and farmers who feed us all. Big agriculture, or agro-business is just that, a business. It doesn't feed our country." 
 Muñoz said that further privatization of seeds in Chile would harm the autonomy of small and medium producers. She said that, currently, "they (small farmers) don't have to depend on a Monsanto, Bayer or a Syngenta to get seeds," referring to other agri-business giants. The inability of smaller growers to use family-developed and shared strains of seeds, she said, would not only be a financial blow, but would erode what the non-profit organization GRAIN calls Chile's "genetic heritage." 
 "It would erase the history of our grandparents, our ancestors who taught us how to care for and grow our seeds," explained Muñoz. 
 Environmental groups joined the fight with organizations like Anamuri because of the bill's impact on biodiversity. Agri-business companies insisted that the bill would not allow for genetically modified organisms (GMO), or foods, to be produced for the domestic market in Chile, but activists disagreed. "If the vast majority of seeds in Chile are registered, the traditional species of seeds will fall into disuse," said Sepúlveda. 
 GMO's are controversial around the world as environmental and consumer protection groups say they harm biodiversity and violate consumer rights because of their potential health effects. And the long controversy over the Monsanto Law in Chile is just one example of the struggle across Latin America between campesinos, small farmers, and the corporate leaders of the global food industry. In Colombia, a national agricultural strike rocked the countryside in 2013 as farmers protested the effects of their own Monsanto Law that was included in a free trade agreement with the United States in 2010. In Argentina, Venezuela and Mexico, seed patenting bills have similarly generated public uproar. 
 The rejection of the law in Chile is being viewed as a triumph for rural and indigenous communities, yet for Chilean social and environmental activists, the struggle is not over. 
 "There are three possible scenarios that could occur now," explains Francisca Rodriguez of Anamuri and the Latin American Coordination of Rural Organizations (CLOC-Via Campesina). "The best would be that the president (Michelle Bachelet) agrees to permanently withdraw the bill." However, the government could also choose to set up a mixed commission to investigate its impact, which would mean consulting social and environmental organizations as well as corporate organizations. The third and worst option in the eyes of peasant and indigenous rights groups is that the bill could be rewritten and reintroduced by the Agricultural Commission. 
 "The corporate lobby is large and powerful and they will try to reintroduce the bill," Rodriguez warns. Corporate stakeholders who seek to privatize seeds and facilitate the spread of GMO crops around the world face widespread resistance in Chile but continue to have the upper hand in terms of political power and wealth. 
 If the seed patenting law does resurface in Chile, organized groups of women, peasants, and indigenous communities appear ready to continue to defend their rights to seeds and small-scale agriculture. 
 "We need to keep insisting publically that the president withdraw it for good. We have to continue organizing," concluded Rodriguez. 
 Together, we can protect the world's most vulnerable people and our precious planet. 
 In Chacore, about 200 kilometers east of Asunción, Paraguay’s capital, Ceferina Guerrero, 68, walks by shelves of carefully-labelled plastic bottles and metal drums. Each contains a native seed variety essential to the diets of rural communities. 
 Their labels list seed names in Guarani, an indigenous language and Paraguay’s second official language, as well as in Spanish. Guerrero introduces them warmly, as a mother would do with her children: this one is a bean, this one is peanut, this is corn. 
 Known as Ña Cefe in her community, Guerrero says her surname (which means ‘warrior’ in Spanish) fits her like a glove. She is one of the founders of the Coordination of Rural and Indigenous Women in Paraguay (Conamuri). 
 Conamuri began as a small group in the 1990s. Today its members include women from more than 200 rural communities in Paraguay and it’s also connected to allies around the world as part of the international peasants’ movement La Via Campesina. 
 Still, Guerrero says, “we should not forget our first objective”: collecting and preserving native seeds across the country. She describes this as a race against time – and the expansion of large-scale, industrial agriculture. 
 “Now we have lost almost 60% of native varieties,” she told me. “We even have communities where you can’t find any.” 
 Meanwhile, the world lost 75% of its seed diversity over the twentieth century. Now, just nine crops comprise 66% of global agricultural production. Only three of these – wheat, rice and corn – account for almost half of the world population’s daily calories. 
 These trends have alarmed NGOs, rural organizations and international institutions. Maintaining biodiversity, the FAO insists, is “fundamental” for food security and the ability to adapt to population growth and climate change. 
 Biodiversity loss also has “specific impacts” on women who have “traditionally been the keepers of profound knowledge of plants, animals and ecological processes,” added the IPES international expert panel on sustainable food systems in 2016. 
 In Paraguay, just 5% of the population owns 90% of the land. Most of this is used by huge agribusinesses to grow just a handful of crops (including soybeans, wheat, rice and corn) on vast plantations for export internationally. 
 Ceferina Guerrero holds corn seeds, in Chacore, Paraguay. Photo: Maria Sanz Dominguez. 
 Last year, the country imported almost 24,000 tons of seeds. Most were for these export crops. Less than 1% were fruit or vegetable seeds, mostly potatoes. Others included Paraguay’s national fruit: mburucuya (passion fruit). 
 Amid corporate pressure on farming and food production, women who preserve native varieties, like Guerrero in Chacore, are “rare, like needles in a haystack,” said Inés Franceschelli, a researcher for the NGO Heñoi (‘to germinate’). 
 “And if Paraguay is so dependent [on foreign companies] for such a basic thing as food,” Franceschelli added, “it means that this is a subordinate country.” 
 Following an intense campaign of mega-mergers since 2016, a small group of just three giant corporations (Bayer-Monsanto, DowDuPont, and Chemchina-Syngenta) now control more than half of the world’s seed market. 
 These seed and agrochemical giants are also active in Paraguay, where they have been allowed to plant transgenic corn, cotton and soy. 
 Guerrero told me that native seeds grow without insecticides, while some transgenic seeds may “produce a nice plant, with nice fruits, but if you collect the seed and plant it again, it would not germinate. You cannot reuse their seeds, and you will have to buy them again and again.” 
 What she described sounds like the effect of a controversial genetic modification that produces sterile seeds once the plant has given its fruits. 
 Sometimes called “Terminator seeds,” some NGOs and rural organizations warn that the use of Genetic Use Restriction Technologies (GURT) can displace native varieties and threaten local food security. 
 The world’s biggest seed companies are all believed to have patents for such technologies, though they deny dealing in them. 
 Monsanto, for instance, has said that it “has never commercialized a biotech trait that resulted in sterile – or ‘Terminator’ – seeds” in food crops and that it has “no plans or research that would violate this commitment.” 
 Currently, Paraguay is also being pressured to adopt the controversial ‘UPOV 91’ seed convention as part of a free trade agreement being negotiated between the European Union and South American commercial bloc Mercosur. 
 Rural organizations fear that this could enable legal prosecutions against country-people for sharing or exchanging their native seeds, as they will not be able to meet the requirements for seed registration under this convention. 
 Over the last decade, Conamuri developed its own proposals for laws to protect native and creole seeds (which are not native but have adapted to local conditions over centuries). These were rejected in 2012, after the impeachment of president Fernando Lugo (seen as likely to accept them). 
 “Then we understood that political power was unstable, so giving the government control over our seeds was not a guarantee for our food sovereignty and security,” Conamuri’s Perla Álvarez told me. “Seeds must be in country-people’s hands.” 
 Native seeds collected and classified by Conamuri members. Photo: Maria Sanz Dominguez. 
 “Country-people hold power in their traditional lifestyles,” adds Franceschelli, from the NGO Heñoi, from the power of healthy nutrition and sustainable land management to that of “living without depending on corporations.” 
 “The resistance against standardization and globalization is located in rural and indigenous communities across the world,” she said. “And this resistance is stronger in women.” 
 Across Paraguay, amid the spread of industrial farming, transgenic crops and seed patents, rural women like Guerrero are on the frontlines of the fight to save native varieties before it’s too late. 
 They are producing ‘green fertilizers’ that help farmland to recover for the next season, and teaching others about agro-ecological farming that takes natural ecosystems into account and encourages planting a diversity of crops. 
 They are carefully labeling containers storing the same varieties of corn their grandmothers used to cook, long ago. They are also rediscovering and preserving native seeds that haven’t been used for many years. 
 In Chacore, Semilla Róga (“the house of the seeds”) is a Conamuri project that hosts country-people from across Paraguay each month to exchange and learn to preserve native and creole seed varieties. 
 Here, Guerrero teaches techniques on how to grow food without pesticides or insecticides. She also has her own seed store at home, preserving more than 60 seed varieties and sharing them with her neighbours. 
 “Since the beginning of agriculture,” she says, “native seeds were linked to women, who were the first ones to collect, keep and plant seeds.” 
 The Semilla Róga project also aims to preserve the knowledge and traditions of communities that use native seeds. “Each corn variety is suitable for a different kind of food, and belongs to a different group of people,” Álvarez explained. 
 “For instance, indigenous people such as the avá and mbya guaraní have coloured corn for ritual use, so the plant also has cultural value,” she said. 
 Natural medicines derived from raw seeds are also popular in Paraguay, where they are often used as cheaper alternatives to conventional drugs. (Coriander seed, for instance, is used to raise natural defenses after illnesses). 
 “If we lose kuratu [coriander], if we lose andai [a local variety of pumpkin], we are losing medicine, and we are also losing our food, a part of our traditions as country-people, and a part of our culture and our identity,” Guerrero told me. 
 Holding a big ear of native red corn, Guerrero explains that it should be harvested during the full moon, when the atmosphere is less humid. She shows me how to collect the little seeds on both ends for food; those in the middle will be stored for planting in the next season. 
 “Some people ask me how many dollars I spend per day. I do not understand that question, because I produce what I need, and for weeks I do not spend a dollar,” she says. “When you have seeds at home, you will never be hungry.” 
 When you give to Intercontinental Cry, you're backing an organization that lives on the frontlines, whose work reaches across all geo-political boundaries in support of Indigenous Peoples. 
 Your gift today will determine how much work we can do tomorrow! 
 Older Posts 
 Except where otherwise noted, articles on this website are licensed under a Creative Commons License | IC is a publication of the Center for World Indigenous Studies (cwis.org), a 501C(3) based in the United States | Hosting by May First / People Link | IntercontinentalCry.org too hard to spell? Try ICMagazine.org 
 Help bring in the new year! Support fearless, uncompromising journalism at Intercontinental Cry! Donate Now 
 CHACSINKÍN, Yuc. (EL UNIVERSAL) .- After the authorization of the planting of transgenic crops in Yucatan and Campeche in 2011 a judicial struggle started in which producers and civil organizations have warned that they will not allow any GMOs to be grown in their lands, as they assure these will be harmful to the population and the environment in the long term. 
 The “Guardians of the Seeds” (Guardianes de las Semillas), a fusion of civil organizations and local producers pointed out that they will continue in their fight so that the sowing of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) is not authorized, and totally forbbiden, even at an experimental level. 
 In order to address the demanded measures against GMOs and protect the production of honey, of which Yucatan is national leader, decree 418 was issued the in 2016, prohibiting GMOs in the state. Nevertheless, the highest court by the Presidency of the Republic, argued that the State Executive is not authorized to prohibit the crops, as the Biosecurity is responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Rural Development, Fisheries and Food: SAGARPA (Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería, Desarrollo Rural, Pesca y Alimentación). 
 In 2011, Yucatecan farmers from the communities of Tekax and Peto, were threatened by the presence of the multinational company Monsanto, which was authorized by the National Service of Health, Safety and Agri-Food Quality (Senasica) to plant transgenic soy in an experimental phase . 
 Then, in 2014, after the pilot of planting transgenic soy was authorized not only in Yucatan but in Campeche and Quintana Roo, an injunction was obtained from the Federal judges, arguing violations to environmental laws. 
 In 2015, the decision suspends a permit granted to the agrichemical firm Monsanto to farm genetically modified soybeans on over 250,000 hectares (618,000 acres) in the region and instructs a federal agency it must first consult with indigenous communities before granting any future permits for transgenic soy farming. 
 To justify their decision the judges drew upon the constitution, which states that the opinion of indigenous communities should be taken into consideration when their way of living and culture could be at risk because of a new project or development. 
 The injunctions against Monsanto, obtained with the support of several non-governmental organizations, were requested by communities whose main economic activity is honey production and collection. 
 After the court’s decision was made public, organizations including Greenpeace, Indignación and Litiga OLE said Maya communities believe that allowing the farming of transgenic soybeans violates their right to be consulted, and is a threat to a healthy environment. 
 The organizations said farming genetically-modified soybeans in the region puts honey production and over 15,000 Maya farm families at risk, as “growing the plant requires the use of glyphosate, a herbicide classified as probably carcinogenic.” 
 For its part, the United States-based Monsanto rejected the claim that GM-soybeans affected in any manner bees or honey production anywhere in Mexico, or that it contributed to deforestation in the state of Campeche, which has also been claimed. 
 “We do not accept the accusations that make us responsible for deforestation and illegal lumbering in the municipality of Hopelchén, Campeche, or any other part of the country, as we abide strictly by local regulations,” said the corporation in a press release. 
 According to Monsanto data, 44,000 hectares of soy were farmed during the most recent cycle in the Yucatán peninsula, and 13,000 of those originated from Monsanto seeds. 
 You can be signed in via any or all of the methods shown below at the same time. 
 My Profile 
 Sign in here to access free tools such as favourites and alerts, or to access personal subscriptions 
 If you have access to journal content via a university, library or employer, sign in here 
 View or download all content the institution has subscribed to. 
 Society 
 If you have access to journal via a society or associations, read the instructions below 
 Members of _ can log in with their society credentials below 
 Access to society journal content varies across our titles. 
 If you have access to a journal via a society or association membership, please browse to your society journal, select an article to view, and follow the instructions in this box. 
 Contact us if you experience any difficulty logging in. 
 Some society journals require you to create a personal profile, then activate your society account 
 This site uses cookies. By continuing to browse the site you are agreeing to our use of cookies. Find out more. 
 The Most Comprehensive Source of GMO Health Information on the Web 
 10 Reasons to Avoid GMOs 
 1. GMOs are unhealthy. The American Academy of Environmental Medicine (AAEM) urges doctors to prescribe non-GMO diets for all patients. They cite animal studies showing organ damage, gastrointestinal and immune system disorders, accelerated aging, and infertility. Human studies show how genetically modified (GM) food can leave material behind inside us, possibly causing long-term problems. Genes inserted into GM soy, for example, can transfer into the DNA of bacteria living inside us, and that the toxic insecticide produced by GM corn was found in the blood of pregnant women and their unborn fetuses. 
 Numerous health problems increased after GMOs were introduced in 1996. The percentage of Americans with three or more chronic illnesses jumped from 7% to 13% in just 9 years; food allergies skyrocketed, and disorders such as autism, reproductive disorders, digestive problems, and others are on the rise. Although there is not sufficient research to confirm that GMOs are a contributing factor, doctors groups such as the AAEM tell us not to wait before we start protecting ourselves, and especially our children who are most at risk. 
 The American Public Health Association and American Nurses Association are among many medical groups that condemn the use of GM bovine growth hormone, because the milk from treated cows has more of the hormone IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor 1)―which is linked to cancer. 
 2. GMOs contaminate―forever. GMOs cross pollinate and their seeds can travel. It is impossible to fully clean up our contaminated gene pool. Self-propagating GMO pollution will outlast the effects of global warming and nuclear waste. The potential impact is huge, threatening the health of future generations. GMO contamination has also caused economic losses for organic and non-GMO farmers who often struggle to keep their crops pure. 
 3. GMOs increase herbicide use. Most GM crops are engineered to be “herbicide tolerant”―they deadly weed killer. Monsanto, for example, sells Roundup Ready crops, designed to survive applications of their Roundup herbicide. 
 Between 1996 and 2008, US farmers sprayed an extra 383 million pounds of herbicide on GMOs. Overuse of Roundup results in “superweeds,” resistant to the herbicide. This is causing farmers to use even more toxic herbicides every year. Not only does this create environmental harm, GM foods contain higher residues of toxic herbicides. Roundup, for example, is linked with sterility, hormone disruption, birth defects, and cancer. 
 4. Genetic engineering creates dangerous side effects. By mixing genes from totally unrelated species, genetic engineering unleashes a host of unpredictable side effects. Moreover, irrespective of the type of genes that are inserted, the very process of creating a GM plant can result in massive collateral damage that produces new toxins, allergens, carcinogens, and nutritional deficiencies. 
 5. Government oversight is dangerously lax. Most of the health and environmental risks of GMOs are ignored by governments’ superficial regulations and safety assessments. The reason for this tragedy is largely political. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), for example, doesn’t require a single safety study, does not mandate labeling of GMOs, and allows companies to put their GM foods onto the market without even notifying the agency. Their justification was the claim that they had no information showing that GM foods were substantially different. But this was a lie. Secret agency memos made public by a lawsuit show that the overwhelming consensus even among the FDA’s own scientists was that GMOs can create unpredictable, hard-to-detect side effects. They urged long-term safety studies. But the White House had instructed the FDA to promote biotechnology, and the agency official in charge of policy was Michael Taylor, Monsanto’s former attorney, later their vice president. He’s now the US Food Safety Czar. 6. The biotech industry uses “tobacco science” to claim product safety. Biotech companies like Monsanto told us that Agent Orange, PCBs, and DDT were safe. They are now using the same type of superficial, rigged research to try and convince us that GMOs are safe. Independent scientists, however, have caught the spin-masters red-handed, demonstrating without doubt how industry-funded research is designed to avoid finding problems, and how adverse findings are distorted or denied. 
 7. Independent research and reporting is attacked and suppressed. Scientists who discover problems with GMOs have been attacked, gagged, fired, threatened, and denied funding. The journal Nature acknowledged that a “large block of scientists . . . denigrate research by other legitimate scientists in a knee-jerk, partisan, emotional way that is not helpful in advancing knowledge.” Attempts by media to expose problems are also often censored. 8. GMOs harm the environment. GM crops and their associated herbicides can harm birds, insects, amphibians, marine ecosystems, and soil organisms. They reduce bio-diversity, pollute water resources, and are unsustainable. For example, GM crops are eliminating habitat for monarch butterflies, whose populations are down 50% in the US. Roundup herbicide has been shown to cause birth defects in amphibians, embryonic deaths and endocrine disruptions, and organ damage in animals even at very low doses. GM canola has been found growing wild in North Dakota and California, threatening to pass on its herbicide tolerant genes on to weeds. 
 9. GMOs do not increase yields, and work against feeding a hungry world. Whereas sustainable non-GMO agricultural methods used in developing countries have conclusively resulted in yield increases of 79% and higher, GMOs do not, on average, increase yields at all. This was evident in the Union of Concerned Scientists’ 2009 report Failure to Yield―the definitive study to date on GM crops and yield. 
 The International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development (IAASTD) report, authored by more than 400 scientists and backed by 58 governments, stated that GM crop yields were “highly variable” and in some cases, “yields declined.” The report noted, “Assessment of the technology lags behind its development, information is anecdotal and contradictory, and uncertainty about possible benefits and damage is unavoidable.” They determined that the current GMOs have nothing to offer the goals of reducing hunger and poverty, improving nutrition, health and rural livelihoods, and facilitating social and environmental sustainability. On the contrary, GMOs divert money and resources that would otherwise be spent on more safe, reliable, and appropriate technologies. 
 10. By avoiding GMOs, you contribute to the coming tipping point of consumer rejection, forcing them out of our food supply. Because GMOs give no consumer benefits, if even a small percentage of us start rejecting brands that contain them, GM ingredients will become a marketing liability. Food companies will kick them out. In Europe, for example, the tipping point was achieved in 1999, just after a high profile GMO safety scandal hit the papers and alerted citizens to the potential dangers. In the US, a consumer rebellion against GM bovine growth hormone has also reached a tipping point, kicked the cow drug out of dairy products by Wal-Mart, Starbucks, Dannon, Yoplait, and most of America’s dairies. 
 NOTE: As an additional motivation to avoid GMOs, you may wish to take a lesson from the animals. Eyewitness reports from around the world describe several situations where animals, when given a choice, avoid genetically modified food. These include cows, pigs, geese, elk, deer, raccoons, mice, rats, squirrels, chicken, and buffalo. We’re pretty sure the animals didn’t read the above 10 reasons. 
 The Campaign for Healthier Eating in America is designed to achieve a tipping point against GMOs in the US. The number of non-GMO shoppers needed is probably just 5% of the population. The key is to educate consumers about the documented health dangers and provide a Non-GMO Shopping Guide to make avoiding GMOs much easier. 
 Please choose healthier non-GMO brands, tell others about GMOs so they can do the same, and join the Non-GMO Tipping Point Network. Together we can quickly reclaim a non-GMO food supply. 
 Comments are closed. 
 This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish.AcceptRead More 
 10 Questions About GM FoodsDo GMOs increase yields and reduce pesticide use, and are they needed to feed the world? Find out in the 16-page document, 10 Questions About GM Foods. 
 Some of you have opted to give a regular donation. This is greatly appreciated as it helps place us on a more stable financial basis. Thank you for your support! 
 2013 articles 
 Interview with Dr Thierry Vrain, GMO whistleblower 
 Interesting interview with a man who changed his mind on GMO but who, unlike Mark Lynas, a GMO convert who went the other way, understands the science. 
 Dr. Thierry Vrain, a former soil biologist and genetic scientist, worked for Agriculture Canada for 30 years. He was the designated spokesperson to assure the public of the safety of GMO crops. Since retiring 10 years ago, after taking into account scientific evidence ignored by most of the bio-tech industry promoters and government regulators, Dr. Vrain has reversed that position and now warns of the dangers from GMOs. 
 Tsiporah Grignon: Was there a pivotal event when you reversed your position on GMOs? 
 Dr. Thierry Vrain: As a scientist working for the government, I didn’t question the status quo or dogma. I just did my work and was the person designated from the institute to reassure the public, so I was very busy. When I retired, my wife and I began an organic farm where I started to discover new things about soil biology never taught in graduate school. Not being on the payroll anymore, I had the freedom to read different sources and look at genetic engineering from new perspectives. That is how I first became aware of the possibility that GMOs were not all rosy and perfect. 
 Q: It is astounding that people don’t question the very idea of altering DNA. When Monsanto or others claim a genetically modified organism is “substantially equivalent” to the conventional plant, it’s illogical to me because when DNA is altered, the plant is altered. It’s not the same and it’s certainly not natural. 
 A: That depends on your view of the world. As a scientist, when you add a bacteria gene to a plant, or a plant gene to a fish, or a human gene to corn, or 10,000 acres of corn growing insulin – they consider it progress. So if a tomato plant has a bacterial gene, it still looks very much like a tomato plant. You couldn’t tell very much from the taste of the tomato so there is something easy about believing in “substantial equivalence.” 
 Q: What do you think of Big Biotech claims that they have the answer to feeding the world, increasing crop yields, decreasing use of pesticides and herbicides, and lowering costs? 
 A: Charles Benbrook [GMW correction: should be Dr Doug Gurian-Sherman], head of the Union of Concerned Scientists from California, who put together the statistics from the USDA to see if there was an increase in yield, discovered that there is no increase in yield, and, in fact, there is a slight decrease, that some of the engineered crops are not as good as the conventional crops. Herbicide use is actually increasing. People are really concerned because there are now Super Weeds resistant to this technology. The GE herbicide is basically useless when the weeds become resistant. This was predicted 25 years ago. Same thing happened with insect resistance. It builds up, so if there is a saving of insecticide today, it will disappear in the next few years. Farmers are now encouraged to spray insecticide on the Bt crops so the insects don’t become resistant to the particular genetically engineered technology… it’s madness! 
 Q: As a soil biologist, what are the effects of GMO crops on the soil? 
 A: Roundup (Monsanto’s herbicide) is a chelator; it holds manganese, magnesium and a few other minerals. It holds the minerals and doesn’t let go so basically it starves the plant. It probably also starves many other creatures in the soil, but I don’t think that is documented. 
 Q: Have you read Prof. Huber’s research on glyphosate, a main active ingredient in Monsanto’s Roundup herbicide? 
 A: Don Huber studied the effect of Roundup on the decrease of nutrients in the plant. I spent time with him two years ago so I am reasonably familiar with what he has written. There is something interesting about your question about the GMO plant’s effect on the soil. The GMO plant is a plant with a new gene that has been inserted somewhere and usually with a gene that makes for the trait, e.g. a bacterial gene that would make a protein that could kill caterpillars. But when you engineer a plant, it is a random process. You need a way to select for the cells to be engineered because not every cell is engineered. And until very recently, the way to do that was to insert another gene (at least the gene you want), an antibiotic resistant gene, usually bacterial genes. And that antibiotic resistance gene is in the genome; it’s in the roots, it can go into the soil, so that can be picked up by the bacteria in the soil. There is a publication out of China, from the University of Szechuan, where researchers have shown that every river in the sample contained antibiotic resistance gene that, in all probability, came from the local transgenic plants. 
 Q: What did The Human Genome Project discover? 
 A: In the cells of every living organism are three major kinds of molecules: carbohydrates made by plant photosynthesis from sunlight and lipids and proteins. The carbs and lipids don’t move; they just sit there. The proteins do the work because they move. Every molecule of protein can twitch, make a movement, and that twitch can do something. That molecule can twitch another molecule and affect something in the cell and that’s what proteins do. Proteins are what make life because life is movement. So when you want to engineer a plant what you are actually doing is engineering a protein in the plant so that the protein will do something new in the plant, such as herbicide or insect resistance. 
 The Human Genome Project was finished in 2002. It took 10 years to sequence the whole genome of a person. The whole genome was deciphered. That was a very important point because the human body functions with about 100,000 proteins. It’s been well known since the late 1940s that DNA calls for proteins and the hypothesis of the 1940s was the “one gene, one protein hypothesis.” The dogma of molecular biology for the last 70 years was that each gene calls for a protein. So they believed if you have 100,000 proteins in your body, you will have 100,000 genes or more. Except when the Human Genome Project was completed we realized we only have 20,000 genes in our body. So 20,000 genes can make (causes the creation of) 100,000 proteins? The math does not add up and that’s what I am referring to. In fact, in 2002, the dogma of the one gene one protein hypothesis became null and void; it just doesn’t work that way. 
 What we discovered was that the genome of any living organism is a much more complex eco-system where 95% of the DNA is actually regulating the other 5% of that code for proteins. OK, you have a new DNA, about 5% of the DNA that is actually coding for protein in the genes. The rest is all kinds of DNA we have no idea how it works. When I was in graduate school, and later as a genetic engineer, it was called Junk DNA [laughter]. When you engineer a plant, you put a gene in the plant. That gene is going to make a protein. And that gene can go anywhere in the plant because you have no control. It goes anywhere in the genome, anywhere in the chromosome. And that gene is now under a regulatory sequence that it was not naturally regulated by before. 
 There are a good number of studies now showing that engineered plants have proteins that are quite different than the proteins that are expected, so-called rogue proteins. These proteins are truncated; they are different. They might function as a protein to kill caterpillars, for example. Or they might not. But they are different and that difference has not been investigated. Basically, the dogma is you put in a gene and you get the protein you want. So much so that the regulatory agencies, when they want to test for the safety of genetically engineered crops, all they need to show is that the protein that was inserted into the plant is safe, but they don’t go and test the new protein actually created in the plant. 
 Q: So unintended consequences are not even looked at, never mind ignored. 
 A: Completely. 
 Q: So how can they get away with calling GMOs safe? 
 A: Before the Human Genome Project, there was the one gene, one protein theory. Scientists simply thought you take a gene from a bacteria and put it in another bacteria, that you will get the protein you want and the effect you want. So it’s considered substantially equivalent. 
 Q: Have they ignored the results of the Human Genome Project? 
 A: I think that the consequences of the Human Genome Project are conveniently ignored. As soon as you start questioning that, and you say, OK, there may be more than one protein in the plant other than the protein intended, you bring in the regulations from the FDA and they are very clear: that if you are putting something on the market that is not substantially equivalent, something that is a little bit different, something that has a new protein or proteins are a little bit different, or the nutrients are a little bit different, then automatically they must do testing. Since 1996, they have completely waived responsibility, saying it’s completely substantially equivalent, claiming there are no differences, therefore companies don’t even need to look at them or do any substantial testing for safety! 
 Q: The 2008 film "The World According to Monsanto" exposed the revolving door between the bio-tech industry and government. 
 A: I read that Dr. Shiv Chopra was offered a million dollars to close his eyes and sign off on the RBGH incident but he refused and was fired because he just wouldn’t shut up. [Editor’s Note: Drs. Shiv Chopra, Margaret Haydon, and Gérard Lambert are former Health Canada scientists who were dismissed for “insubordination” in 2004 after publicly expressing serious reservations about the approval of products they believed would harm the food chain and ultimately threaten the well-being of Canadians. A cross Canada public speaking tour, starting in BC, with Dr. Chopra and Dr. Vrain, is in the planning stage for the second half of November.] 
 Q: Are you still in touch with some of your GE colleagues and are they aware of your turnabout? 
 A: No. You can now see how it is possible for scientists to ignore major sources of information. 
 Q: How can scientists operate independently when their paycheque depends on supporting a specific point of view? 
 A: When I started 30 years ago, I was given a lab, a technical assistant and a small budget and basically the game was play in the lab and make sure you publish and the more you publish, the better. So it was called "publish or perish". But something happened 25 years ago; the game changed. When I started, corporate sponsors were not allowed. I could not go to Monsanto and say, “Are you interested in me doing some work in my lab and for a small grant I could do research for you.” But 25 years ago, it became allowed and then it became very strongly encouraged to seek corporate funding. The more Industry was interested in your project, the more outside money you could have. That was a sign that you were doing good work because you were getting extra funding so the government didn’t have to give you money for your lab. So more and more that became the thing of the day, and, of course, there was lots of money for molecular biology. Others complained that all the money went to molecular biology in the late 80s and early 90s. Not only that, if you were successful and hit on a really good project, you could patent. So from "publish or perish" we went to "patent and get rich". 
 Now a lot of scientists get grants from biotech companies. When you get a half a million dollar grant, you have five graduate students, three post docs and a big lab and now you’re professor so and so because you have a big lab with lots of money flowing. But if you publish results that are not acceptable to companies such as Monsanto, your corporate grant is going to dry up. 
 Q: I read in "Seeds of Deception" about the random insertion of the genes, that there is no way it can be precise, which you have confirmed. So why do scientists claim precision when genetically altering nature? 
 A: It is about the money. Again, it becomes very important for the biotech companies to push aside the studies that are not confirming the corporate line or questioning safety. But it’s simpler. Most investors in the biotech companies just want to make money… it’s the bottom line. They may think if they can get away with selling it then why not? 
 Q: Are they still getting away with it? 
 A: They are getting away with it. You may be questioning it; you may be avoiding GMOs and I certainly am and we may be kicking the giants. But, really, quite frankly, they (have no shame) buying the courts, the governments and the Senate. 
 Q: But they didn’t fully buy everybody in Europe … there’s enough resistance in Europe. 
 A: No they didn’t buy everyone in Europe, but they sure tried. There are basically about five countries in the world that grow GMO crops… India, Argentina, Canada, the US, and a couple of others and there’s some 20 countries that actually do not require labeling or have no restrictions. All over Europe there is labeling and as soon as you have labeling, there are no more GMOs because people don’t want them. 
 Q: In Canada we are battling to stop GMO alfalfa and the non-browning apple. 
 A: The non-browning apple began in my lab in Summerland, BC. Somebody got the bright idea of how can we make money. Well, we were in apple country, so what about the technology out of Australia to silence the gene that browns the apple, and therefore have an apple that never goes brown? But the growers are against it and the organic growers are up in arms. 
 Q: You referred to a 120-page study GMO Myths and Truths released in June of 2012. 
 A: It’s a document put together by genetic engineers Dr. Michael Antoniou and Dr. John Fagan with Claire Robinson, an investigative journalist. It’s a compilation of articles and government reports, most of them questioning the safety of GMOs. It was published in June so the Seralini study wasn’t in there. It represents a lot of work, mostly from independent labs in Europe and it shows GM crops don’t yield more. It does go into what I call genetic pollution: that engineered crops are releasing their pollen so the genes are released in the environment, whether it’s bacteria or other plants. 
 Q: If you have terminator genes, do they pollinate? 
 A: Terminator genes are an interference technology where the seed or pollen becomes infertile. 
 Q: So it’s possible to pass on infertility? 
 A: Yes, it is. That’s why so many people are concerned about it. Imagine if you had a field of corn with a gene for infertility and the gene spread around to the whole agricultural area and was picked up from other crops. 
 Q: So, in other words, pollen from a terminator plant can turn another plant into another terminator plant… That could be the end of all life on Earth as we know it? 
 A: That’s why Monsanto was stopped in 1995. They wanted to test and commercialize it. You see, the engineered crops are patented; corporations don’t want people to keep [their own] seed because if farmers keep seeds, the patent holder loses money. You have to buy seeds every year from them. By making the seeds infertile, then nobody would keep the seeds. We are talking famine here … insanity. But Monsanto did acquire the terminator technology and they might try bringing it out again. 
 Q: As somebody interested in quality food and how it is grown, are you hopeful? 
 A: My wife is a herbalist and works with our chef at the farm because we believe a healthy diet is incredibly important. We need that connection between what we eat and who we are. If you just go to the store and buy the cheapest food full of calories and very little nutrition, you’re going to get sick. 
 CONCLUSION 
 This conversation with a GMO whistleblower was sobering. We now know uncomfortable truths about GMOs and the biotech companies that profit from them. In this interview, we learned from a former insider how genetic engineering is an imprecise technology, lacks safety tests, that GMO crops contaminate other crops, and how the scientific method gets abused for money. Dr. Thierry Vrain changed and is now an organic farmer. He realized that the way to feed the world is to create and support sustainable farms working with nature. 
 It is our duty to stop biotech crime against nature. You can make a difference. Learn more and get involved. We are not alone. Participate with millions of people taking part in the Global Day of Action Against GMOs in more than 600 cities world-wide on Saturday, October 12. It is the biggest single event ever to take place opposing a Biotech Company. See more at www.march-against-monsanto.com 
 Speaking Tour 
 GE Free BC and Greenpeace Vancouver are excited to announce “Genetically Engineered Foods and Human Health”, a Canadian Speaker’s Tour to spread awareness, educate and share concerns about genetically engineered foods. The cross-Canada tour features Dr. Thierry Vrain, a former genetic scientist for Agriculture Canada for 30 years and Dr. Shiv Chopra, a scientist who worked at Health Canada for 35 years, and a tireless protector of the food supply worldwide. 
 November 19 
 Special event co-sponsored by Common Ground 
 Drs. Thierry Vrain and Shiv Chopra give a talk, Tuesday Nov. 19, 7PM, Canadian Memorial United Church in the Sanctuary. The church is next to the Centre for Peace, corner of 15th & Burrard. Free street parking. Bus Route 033. This is a by-donation event. 
 If you wish to help host, support, or sponsor this tour, please call Common Ground. See details about events in your community at www.gefreebc.wordpress.com and www.cban.ca. Email This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. 
 Home » 16 October: La Via Campesina relaunches “Global Campaign for Seeds, a heritage of Peoples in the Service of Humanity” 
 16 October: La Via Campesina relaunches “Global Campaign for Seeds, a heritage of Peoples in the Service of Humanity” 
 La Via Campesina relaunches the “Global Campaign for Seeds, a heritage of Peoples in the Service of Humanity”, on the occasion of the International Day of Action for the Food Sovereignty of Peoples and Against Multinationals 
 (Harare, October 16, 2018) Peasants’ seeds are a heritage of peoples in the service of humanity. They are the basis of global food production and they enable peasants to produce and consumers and citizens to find healthy and diversified food. They allow us to resist, maintain our ancestral cultures and defend our peasant identity. 
 However, these seeds of life are threatened by the seed policies of rich countries, free trade agreements and agribusiness. Under the pretext of “improving” seed productivity, agribusiness has created a neo-liberal seed system that has homogenized, impoverished and monopolized seeds, causing the loss of three-quarters of seed diversity and annihilating a diversity that it took people – thanks to the work of peasants – 10000 years to generate. 
 Three companies, Monsanto-Bayer, Syngenta-ChemChina and Dupont-Dow, control more than 50% of the world’s commercial seeds – increasingly genetically modified seeds to resist herbicides and produce insecticides. Under the impetus of the WTO, the World Bank and the IMF, and through free trade agreements and laws protecting seed and breeders’ rights, such as UPOV standards, this seed system only allows the circulation of its own seeds, criminalizing the saving, exchange, donation and sale of local farmer seeds. 
 The situation is such that farmers have lost a lot of their local seeds, are put in prison for the defense and exchange of their seed heritage, and risk raids and seizure of their seeds. Biodiversity is destroyed by the use of chemical fertilizers, hybrid seeds and genetically modified organisms developed by multinational companies. Citizens have difficulty accessing healthy, diversified and healthy food. 
 La Via Campesina and its allies are fighting to change the situation. All over the world, La Via Campesina and its member organizations are stepping up their efforts in training, education, mutual support and seed exchange. We fight for national laws and international treaties to guarantee the rights of farmers to save, use, exchange, sell and protect their seeds against biopiracy and genetic contamination, we write books on the history of seeds, carry out studies and mapping. We also found agro-ecology schools and organize peasant’ seed exchange fairs. We exercise our right of self-determination to select the seed varieties we want to plant and reject economically, ecologically and culturally dangerous varieties. These are rights affirmed by the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and by the United Nations Declaration on Peasants’ Rights which has just been adopted by the Human Rights Council in Geneva. It is also the only way to ensure healthy food for citizens, the preservation of biodiversity and the achievement of food sovereignty. 
 It is in this spirit that we launched in 2001 in Rome the International Campaign of Peasant Seeds, a heritage of peoples in the service of humanity, with the objective of promoting the recovery of traditional systems for the conservation, maintenance and exchange of local seeds and the inalienable collective rights of peasants over their seeds. On this October 16, 2018, on the occasion of the World Day of Action for Food Sovereignty of Peoples and Against Multinationals, we are relaunching this campaign and the “Adopt a Seed” action. 
 We call on every peasant, peasant family or community to engage in the adoption of a variety of plant or animal seeds, to become the guardian of this seed, ensuring its propagation, reproduction and distribution and to engage in the collective defense of their rights to use, exchange, sell and protect them. In this way, we will create a large network of peasant seeds to save those that have become rare and extend production towards the food sovereignty of peoples. 
 By adopting a seed, peasant families preserve their identity and territory and affirm their peasant way of life. They claim the historical memory and ancestral culture of seed management, promoting an urban and rural ecological agriculture that reproduces the miracle of more seeds and food of better quality, taste and nutritional value. 
 No government measure can limit the collective rights of farmers to use, exchange and sell their seeds. Free consent between farmers should be applied without restriction. 
 La Via Campesina 
 Without seeds, there is no agriculture; without agriculture, there is no food; and without food, there are no peoples. 
 We feed our peoples and build the movement to change the world! 
Food Sovereignty:
A Critical Dialogue
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE
YALE UNIVERSITY
SEPTEMBER 14-15, 2013

Conference Paper #18

Maize as sovereignty:
anti-GM activism in Mexico and
Colombia
Liz Fitting

Maize as sovereignty:
anti-GM activism in Mexico and Colombia
Liz Fitting
Conference paper for discussion at:
Food Sovereignty: A Critical Dialogue
International Conference
September 14-15, 2013
Convened by
Program in Agrarian Studies, Yale University
204 Prospect Street, # 204, New Haven, CT 06520 USA
http://www.yale.edu/agrarianstudies/
The Journal of Peasant Studies
www.informaworld.com/jps
Yale Sustainable Food Project
www.yale.edu/sustainablefood/
in collaboration with
Food First/Institute for Food and Development Policy
398 60th Street, Oakland, CA 94618 USA
www.foodfirst.org
Initiatives in Critical Agrarian Studies (ICAS)
International Institute of Social Studies (ISS)
P.O. Box 29776, 2502 LT The Hague, The Netherlands
www.iss.nl/icas
Transnational Institute (TNI)
PO Box 14656, 1001 LD Amsterdam, The Netherlands
www.tni.org
with support from
The Macmillan Center, the Edward J. and Dorothy Clarke Kempf Memorial
Fund and the South Asian Studies Council at Yale University
http://www.yale.edu/macmillan/kempf_fund.htm
http://www.yale.edu/macmillan/southasia
© July 2013 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced
or transmitted in any form or by any means without prior permission from the
publisher and the author.

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

Abstract
In this conference paper, I consider some of the strengths and weaknesses of the food
sovereignty (FS) approach based on my research among anti-GM activists in Colombia and
Mexico. Food sovereignty is taken up by anti-GM activists and rural producers in a way that is
shaped by the particularities of place. Despite reproducing some of the problems of FS, I argue
that these activists draw our attention to the specific issues and contexts of their region –
particularly through their focus on maize-- and illustrate the usefulness of a food sovereignty
approach. Their campaigns focus on maize as a symbol of sovereignty (at various scales) and
campesino and indigenous ways of life, which activists believe are undermined by transgenic
varieties of corn. In doing so, these campaigns situate the issue of GM corn imports, testing,
and commercial cultivation within a broader critique of neoliberal globalization.

Introduction
“Without corn there is no country” (Sin maíz, no hay país) –Slogan from Mexican
anti-GM network, In Defense of Maize
“We [the Zenú] are maize seeds, we are people of corn.” –statement posted on
website of Red Agroecologica del Caribe (RECAR) Colombia (Nov 4, 2009,
accessed June 14, 2012).
“For the indigenous communities of the Zenú, maize is a fundamental element, a
pillar of our culture, our productive systems and the food sovereignty [soberanía
alimentaría] of our people.
--Zenú Declaration of their Territory as Transgenic Free, Resguardo indígena Zenú
Córdoba y Sucre, Colombia (October 7, 2005)
Colombian activists have organized a campaign against transgenic or genetically modified (GM)
seeds and crops. Much like their counterparts in Mexico, activists use maize as a symbol of
national sovereignty as well as campesino and indigenous livelihoods and cultures, which they
believe are undermined by transgenic varieties of corn. Genetically modified organisms (GMOs)
are “global objects of contention” (Müller 2006) that take on specific characteristics and
meanings in particular times and places. In Latin America, activists see transgenic maize as an
embodiment of contemporary imperialism or neoliberal globalization –a foreign threat to
“sovereignty” in different senses (and scales like community, region and nation) including self-

MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 1

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

governance, economic independence, cultural autonomy, and access to and control of native
varieties1 and genetic resources.
In this paper, I consider some of the strengths and weaknesses of the food sovereignty (FS)
approach and political project based on my research among anti-GM activists in Colombia and
Mexico. 2 Coined by the transnational peasant and farmers’ rights group Via Campesina in the
mid-1990s as part of their critique of neoliberal globalization 3 and a narrowly defined concept
of “food security” (which focuses not on the domestic production and control of food but
making food accessible via imports), food sovereignty has been a work-in-progress, with many
versions and definitions (Patel 2009). One of the key elements of FS has been its call for
producers’ control over their productive resources, such as land, water, seeds, and so on
(Wittman, Desmarais and Wiebe 2010: 3). Another key element is its insistence on democratic
participation and the ability of communities, regions, nations, and states to decide their own
food and agrarian policies and regulations.
Both of these aspects of the food sovereignty approach have been taken up by anti-GM
activists in Colombia and Mexico. In much of the global south, resistance to this technology
tends to focus on the effects of GMOs on the environment and small-scale farmers’ livelihoods,
as well as the issue of property rights (Schurman 2003: 11). Some of the “most intense,
sustained, and effective” campaigns against agricultural biotechnology have taken place in
Western Europe, where early anti-GM activism successfully mobilized consumers around a
different set of issues: food safety, ideas about preserving rural society, and ethical concerns
about genetic engineering as “playing God” or defiling the natural boundaries between species
(ibid: 9-10).

1

I use the terms “native” and “traditional” varieties interchangeably and with some reservations. These are
contrasting terms to “modern” or “improved” varieties. The terminology implies that “native” varieties are not the
result of human intervention or improvement. However, their development does involve in-field plant breeding,
albeit one very distinct from the scientific plant breeding tradition which emerged in sixteenth century Europe. I
prefer the commonly used Spanish term “criollo” which means both “traditional” variety and creolized variety (an
in-field mix of traditional and improved varieties).
2
This paper is based on interviews with activists and indigenous leaders in Colombia (during the fall of 2011 to
spring of 2012), ethnographic research in Mexico with maize producers, interviews with participants in the GM
corn debates such as activists, biologists, and regulators (2000-2002, with extended visits over the next 6 years),
and analysis of national media coverage in both countries on GMOs (particularly newspapers, activist list-serves
and websites). In a forthcoming publication (Fitting 2014), I compare anti-GM campaigns in Mexico and Colombia,
but without the focus on food sovereignty.
3
For the sake of brevity, I don’t define neoliberal globalization here. I define the term elsewhere (2011). In many
ways, activists discuss neoliberal globalization as a new form of imperialism or neo-colonialism.
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 2

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

Food sovereignty, however, can fall into agrarian populism (as an approach that is too
homogenizing, romantic and ahistorical, see for example Bernstein 2013)4 and the problems of
a “big tent” concept, which can be so broad it becomes inconsistent, even embracing
oppositional agendas (Patel 2009). In this paper, I explore the ways food sovereignty is taken up
by anti-GM activists and rural producers in Mexico and Colombia, and how this engagement is
shaped by regional issues and contexts. I argue that despite reproducing some of the problems
of FS, these activists draw our attention to the specific contexts and cultures of their region –
particularly through their focus on maize-- and illustrate the usefulness of a food sovereignty
approach. In other words, this paper is a critical appreciation of food sovereignty.
After spending years researching the debates over GM corn in Mexico, including research in a
town of migrants and maize producers (petty commodity producers who self-identified as
campesinos), I decided to interview seed activists while based in Colombia. I learned that maize
became a strategic focus of the anti-GM campaign in Colombia based, in part, on lessons
learned from the 2001 controversy in Mexico over gene flow between transgenic and native
varieties of maize, which was seen by activists as the world’s first case of “genetic pollution” in
a crop’s center of biological diversity and origin. Activists saw lessons in both the finding of
transgenes in traditional cornfields of highland Oaxaca and elsewhere in Mexico, and the
organized activist response to these findings. In Colombia, activists were concerned that
“genetic pollution” could similarly occur in their country via corn imports (and later commercial
production), and were motivated to use maize as a symbol and focal point for their own
campaign after discussing these environmental risks and activist organizing strategies with
Mexicans involved in the anti-GM “In Defense of Corn” campaign (discussed further below).
Activists mobilize narratives about the cultural and economic importance of traditional corn
varieties (criollos) 5, and in doing so highlight the specificity of place. In both Mexico and
Colombia, maize is representative of the “nation” --be it the nation-state or an indigenous
people and territory. Among the Colombian anti-GM activists and indigenous leaders I spoke to,
maize represents indigeneity and indigenous culture. In Mexico maize is a symbol of indigeneity
but also the nation, with its complex history of cultural and racial mixing. 6 Activist slogans and
4

For example, FS often treats disparate types of rural labour as part of one unified (and ahistorical) category
(overlooking class differences) and romanticizes smalls-scale farming as ecologically-friendly production (Bernstein
2013; also Bernstein 2009). I make a similar argument about the In Defense of Maize campaign in Mexico (Fitting
2006b, 2011).
5
Criollo is a common term in Spanish to refer to both “traditional” varieties (sometimes called “maíz nativo” or
“native maize”) and creolized varieties (an in-field mix of traditional and improved varieties).
6
th
Maize has long been a symbol of indigenous and rural Mexico. In the late 19 century into the contemporary
period, it became a symbol of mestizo (racially/culturally mixed) Mexico. Associations with the rural and
indigenous have been positive and celebratory at times (among environmentalists and anti-GM activists today for
instance); while at other moments, corn production has been portrayed by government officials and rural experts
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 3

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

statements such as “We are a people of corn” and “Without corn there is no country”
emphasize maize as a place-specific way of life, food, agricultural crop, biological resource, and
cultural practice. The crop invokes, at times, elements of shared culture across different scales
of place ranging from the small rural community or region, the nation-state, to indigenous and
rural Mesoamerica.
I begin by providing a brief discussion of the importance of corn in the two countries, some
background information about the regulation of GMOs, and why activists have concerns about
them. I then turn to how food sovereignty is used by activists and the ways Mexican activism
and the controversy over transgenic corn influenced anti-GM activism in Colombia.
Cultures of corn
Maize is such a powerful symbol because of its multi-faceted economic, cultural, and political
importance. Corn continues to be grown by mestizo and indigenous petty commodity
producers (who often identify as campesinos) because it is a traditional crop and a mainstay of
the rural diet, and it has multiple, flexible uses: if it is produced for household consumption, if
there are no interested buyers, or the price of maize is too low, the crop is dried and eaten as
grain in various corn-based foods and beverages (such as tortillas and atole in Mexico and
arepas and mazamorra or peto in Colombia). These maize-based foods are regularly consumed
in cities, but in the countryside every part of the corn plant is put to use. The shelled cobs are
burned as fuel for fire, the leftover stalks are given to animals as feed, and in Mexico the dried
husks are used to wrap tamales. When cash is needed in emergencies, the grain can be sold in
small amounts (although often at a loss). Additionally, because traditional varieties of corn tend
to be well adapted to local conditions and environments, corn is considered hardier than other
cash crops. 7
In Mexico, maize is cultivated on 8,000,000 hectares, most of which is rain-fed and involves
non-industrial farming (Turrent Fernández, Wise and Garvey 2012: 7). The farming, milling, and
cooking of maize is a key part of everyday life in the countryside. The crop is so central to the
rural diet that a meal is considered incomplete without tortillas. In many indigenous regions of
the Americas, maize seed retains a strong spiritual significance and is the focus of a variety of
rituals involving the blessing of seed, celebrating the harvest, and so on. For many indigenous
peoples, like the Zapotecs of Oaxaca, maize has a soul (González 2001).

as a backward, traditional, non-competitive crop. See Fitting, The Struggle for Maize (2011), Pilcher, Que Vivan los
Tamales! (1998), and Warman, 2003 [1988] Corn and Capitalism.
7
In my research in the Tehuacán Valley of Mexico, campesinos explained how their criollo corn was a resilient crop,
which fare better than other crops particularly during periods of low rainfall (Fitting 2011: 203)
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 4

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

In rural Colombia, while maize is also regularly eaten in both rural and urban areas, generally
speaking it is not required to complete a meal. It is grown on approximately 460,000 hectares
(in 2010), largely along the Atlantic Coast in the department of Córdoba, followed by Sucre and
Cesar, but also in the interior departments of Tolima, Meta, Valle and Huila (Fenalce 2011).
While maize represents a way of life for those indigenous groups like the Zenú who grow the
crop, it is not central to the idea of the nation as a whole –what it means to be Colombian—to
the extent it is in Mexico.
A neoliberal food regime
The commercial planting of biotech crops around the globe went from 1.7 million hectares in
1996 to 160 million hectares in 2011 (ISAAA 2011). Food scholars have suggested that genetic
engineering and its regulation are central to an emergent neoliberal food regime (Pechlaner
and Otero 2008) – or the institutional structures, norms and practices of food trade,
governance and political economy (Friedmann 1987, McMichael 2009). This regime is
sometimes discussed as a feature of a contemporary capitalism –or biocapitalism—which
involves the harnessing and management of biological processes and resources in order to
generate profit. Transgenic seed is often accompanied by intellectual property rights (IPRs)
which require users to pay a licensing fee in addition to the initial seed purchase. IPR runs
counter to the widespread practice of agriculturalists to save and exchange seed for replanting,
and provides another way to overcome the free reproduction of seed, or seed’s ‘‘biological
barrier to commodification’’ (Kloppenburg 1988). The commercialization of seed, including
IPRs, contributes to ‘‘accumulation by dispossession,’’ or the accumulation of capital by
undermining a group’s access and control over the resources that it needs to maintain its
livelihood (Harvey 2003, 147–48).
Another feature of the current food regime worth mentioning here is how trade agreements
and the World Trade Organization protect farm subsidies in the global north, while countries
from the global south import staple foods that they themselves produce. Both Mexico and
Colombia have seen rising corn imports in recent years for use as animal feed, food, and
industrial purposes. In Mexico imports reach 8 to 9 million metric tons per year (or higher in
years of production shortfalls). 8 However, with the right policies, Mexico could once again be
self-sufficient in maize production (Turrent Fernández, Alvadeño Salazar, Moreno Dahme 1997;
Turrent Fernández, Wise and Garvey 2012). In Colombia, imports have increased since the
1990s, reaching 3.3 million metric tons in 2010, although a new government program hopes to
reduce imports (Fenalce 2011: 4).
8

This rose in 2011 to 12 million tons due to production shortfalls in Mexico. Most imports are used for animal feed
or industrial uses. Recent figures are from Rodríguez 2011. Mexico imported corn in years previous to the
neoliberal period of austerity measures in the 1980s and trade liberalization of the 1990s, but not at current levels.
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 5

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

As Pechlaner and Otero importantly point out, “despite prevailing trends, sufficient local
resistance to [agricultural bio-] technology could modify or even derail, the technology’s role in
individual nations, and accordingly, in the unfolding food regime as a whole.” (2008: 352).
Indeed, many anti-GM activists act as policy watchdogs, and in places like Mexico have been
quite successful in raising public concern around the import, testing and commercial production
of transgenic maize.
Regulation
Scientists and government regulators began to debate the risks and benefits of transgenic
maize in Mexico in the mid-1990s with the impending release of GM corn in the United States.
The issue was also discussed at the Mexican Ministry of Agriculture in the late 1980s, when it
started to grant permits for scientific field trials of GM crops (in 1988), advised by an ad hoc
committee consisting of scientists from various disciplines and government agencies. This later
became the National Agricultural Biosafety Committee (CNBA) in 1992. In a period of ten years,
Mexico approved the commercial release of over 31 agricultural GMOs for human
consumption, including alfalfa, canola, cotton, tomatoes, soybean, potatoes and maize
(Pechlaner and Otero 2008). In late 1998, the CNBA --now the Specialized Agricultural
Subcommittee of the Inter-Ministerial Commission on Biosafety (CIBIOGEM)-- imposed a de
facto moratorium on GM corn trials because the traits most commonly tested were not of any
particular benefit to Mexico (Alvarez-Morales 1999: 91) and the committee had concerns about
the possibility of transgenic corn hybridizing with or displacing native varieties and teosinte, a
wild relative of maize (Serratos 1996). Although the moratorium on the cultivation and field
trial testing of transgenic maize had been in place at the time, transgenic maize most likely
made its way into the country through US imports. 9
In Colombia, the regulation of GMOs began in the late 1990s, under Decree 4525, and was
modified in 2005, which established three technical committees (on health, agriculture, and the
environment) to evaluate GMOs. The National Agricultural Institute (ICA), a branch of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Development, is responsible for “ensuring the quality of agricultural
inputs and seeds used in Colombia, while regulating and controlling the use of living modified
organisms by genetic engineering to agriculture.” 10 The first GMO approved in Colombia was a
blue carnation in 2000. The following year it was cultivated in greenhouses for export. The
second crop to be approved for commercial production was cotton in 2003. Transgenic corn
was approved (with pest resistance and herbicide tolerance) for controlled plots in 2007,
9

On a much smaller scale, corn may also have been introduced by Mexican migrants returning home from the
United States and curious to try out a new variety in their own fields.
10

From the ICA website (accessed August 15, 2012) http://www.ica.gov.co/El-ICA.aspx
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 6

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

followed by an approval for the commercial production of soybeans in late 2010. As in Mexico,
approval is given on a case by case basis. The cultivation of maize requires a buffer zone or
“refuge” between the plot and any other crops, which is monitored by ICA.
Corn controversy
The finding of transgenic maize in Mexico garnered considerable media and activist attention
around the globe as the world’s first case of “genetic pollution” in a crop’s center of biodiversity
and origin. In 2001, Ignacio Chapela and David Quist published the results of their study that
three different transgenic DNA sequences were found in criollo corn from the highlands of
Oaxaca, Mexico. 11 The likely source of these transgenic DNA sequences was corn imported from
the United States, where at the time 25 percent of the crop was transgenic and unlabeled as
such (USDA 2012). Today 88 percent of US maize is transgenic (ibid). Scientists and activists
found similar evidence in other parts of Mexico, including the government’s corn supply
(Ezcurra, Ortiz, and Soberón 2002; INE-CONABIO 2002).
This finding of GM corn growing in rural Mexico became a cause célèbre for international
environmental NGOs like Greenpeace, seed and food groups such as the small international
non-profit GRAIN, and Via Campesina. Different positions and opinions about the controversy
were articulated through channels such as activist organized events like press conferences,
rallies, and seed exchanges, academic and scientific research papers, government debates
before Congress, government and activist working groups and conferences, and in the national
and international media, particularly newspapers and activist, NGO and agro-biotechnology
focused websites. 12
The unintentional gene flow between transgenic corn and native varieties in Mexico was
discussed by activists as contamination, a kind of genetic pollution or trespassing of unwanted
living material that has, or could have, negative environmental impacts (Cleveland, Soleri, and
Aragon 2003; Soleri, Cleveland, Aragón, Fuentes, Ríos, and Sweeney 2005). Such impacts
include the growth of herbicide tolerance and pest resistance, unforeseen negative
consequences for non-target organisms, and the loss of traditional seed varieties --which is also
possible with non-transgenic, breeder-improved or “modern” varieties. In addition to the
environmental impact of transgenic seeds and crops, activists in both Mexico and Colombia
raise concerns about the effect of GMOs on cultural autonomy and practices related to food
and agriculture (particularly in the case of maize) and the commodification of the seed, which
11

The Bacillus thuringiensis or Bt toxin gene, the cauliflower mosaic virus CaMV gene promoter, and the nopaline
synthase or NOS terminator sequence (Chapela and Quist 2001; Quist and Chapela 2002).
12 See the Mexican In Defense of Maize (endefensadelmaiz.net) and the Argentina-based Biodiversity in Latin
America (biodiversidadla.org) for key activist websites. For posts in support of agricultural biotechnology see,
www.agrobiomexico.org.mx or the international site at www.agrobioworld.org
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 7

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

has economic and political ramifications for farmer livelihoods. Not only are agriculturalists
facing more expensive inputs or costs (at a time when state financial and technical support for
such farmers has been cut) but they have been largely excluded from regulatory decisions and
frameworks for GMOs.13
Anthropologists have explored how GMOs have come to represent neoliberal globalization or
US economic and political dominance which threatens regional or national sovereignty in places
like Mexico, France and Costa Rica, (Fitting 2006b, 2011, Heller 2002, Pearson 2009). Among
Mexican and Colombian activists, transgenic corn in particular is seen as a foreign threat. In my
interview with a Pijao community leader from Tolima, Colombia he explained what he saw as
the problem with transgenic corn by telling me that his community wants to protect criollos
from seed that both “come[s] from outside our culture” and “runs counter” to it (Interview,
February 2012, Bogotá).
Although activists in both Mexico and Colombia focus their campaigns on corn, narratives about
maize as a way of life threatened by transgenic varieties resonate differently in these two
countries. In Colombia, there has been very little public debate weighing the benefits and
problems of genetically engineered crops and food, however, there are now several indigenous
territories (resguardos) 14 that have been declared transgenic free (territorios libres de
transgénicos). Activists admit that these are isolated victories and there is not much discussion
or support for their campaign on a more general level. In contrast, in Mexico, the mobilization
of activists around the import and regulation of transgenic corn and the controversial finding of
such maize growing in in the countryside generated enormous media attention at home and
abroad.
In Defense of Maize: Mexican anti-GM activism
The anti-GM campaign and network, In Defense of Maize, was established in 2002 in response
to the scandal over transgenic corn. The network consists of over 300 environmental, food
activist, peasant and indigenous rights organizations, most of which are Mexican, such as the
Environmental Studies Group (GEA), the National Association of Rural Commercialization
Enterprises (ANEC), National Support Center for Indigenous Missions (CENAMI), the Union of
13

Other issues raised are food safety and a call to adhere to the precautionary principle in biosafety assessment,
which states that the absence of scientific knowledge about a risk should not hinder actions to reduce a risk (NRC
2002: 64). This principle has been employed in various international treaties and declarations like the Cartagena
Protocol on Biosafety.
14
Resguardos are indigenous territories based on communal landholdings. Under the Colombian Constitution of
1991, indigenous peoples were given the right to manage the political and administrative affairs of their territories.
There are currently 710 legally recognized resguardos located in 27 departments and 228 municipalities
(ABColombia 2010:16).
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 8

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

Concerned Scientists Committed to Society (UCCS) and Seeds of Life (Fundación Semillas de
Vida). Mexican members of Via Campesina have been active in the network as well as two
transnational organizations with offices in Mexico City, Greenpeace Mexico and the Action
Group on the Environment, Technology and Concentration (ETC Group). Numerous academics,
researchers, and scientists unaffiliated with an activist organization or NGO are also involved.
Members have initiated and participated in an enormous variety of projects that range from
running media campaigns, promoting criollo seed exchanges and fairs, establishing seed banks,
hosting workshops for campesinos on seed saving, organizing a network of GM free tortillas,
testing for transgenes in the field, participating in government consultations on biodiversity and
biosafety (for example, in the making of the Biosafety Law of 2005) to conducting various types
of research (environmental, legal, socio-cultural, etc.) on the impacts of transgenic varieties.
Elsewhere I critique In Defense of Maize for representing peasants as a unified and ahistorical
category of experience and identity, romanticizing indigenous and campesino communities as
more egalitarian (overlooking class and gender differences within and between communities)
and their agriculture as eco-friendly, and suggesting they are beyond capitalism (as part of the
natural economy rather than petty commodity producers today) --representations that,
ironically, share similarities with those forwarded by neoliberal government officials (see Fitting
2006b and 2011).
However, I also commend In Defense of Maize on several grounds: 1) the campaign highlights a
call for more direct democratic involvement, particularly of disenfranchised rural actors, in
policy making and regulation; 2) it offers a multi-dimensional critique of GMOs as part of a
larger discussion of neoliberal capitalism and governance; 3) its focus on maize as a symbol of
Mexican sovereignty threatened by neoliberal globalization not only foregrounds the
multifaceted significance of maize in Mexico –where corn is much more than a commodity-- it
connects disparate NGOs and activists together under a wide umbrella (part of the appeal of
“big tent concepts”); and finally, 4) the campaign promotes concrete policy and legislative
changes in addition to their more abstract demands. A couple of these points warrant a more
detailed exploration.
From its inception at a forum in Mexico City in 2002, the In Defense of Maize campaign has
employed the concept of “food sovereignty” in its discussions. The concept even appears in the
forum’s conclusions: 15 participants call on the Mexican government “to recognize the principle
15

Conclusions from the Forum can be found at: http://www.ceccam.org.mx/ConclusionesDefensa.htm
Food sovereignty is also discussed in the following sentence from the Conclusions: “Agrarian and commercial
policies not only threaten the national production of maize that constitutes the core of the peasant economy and
organization, but also food sovereignty.” My translation.
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 9

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

of food sovereignty and give priority to the consumption of Mexican corn” rather than relying
on imports. The conclusions also state, “We demand that food, agricultural and environmental
policies be sustainable, fair, and sovereign, developed in collaboration with civil society.” 16 At
this 2002 forum, a multidimensional approach to GMOs was evident as participants not only
discussed the environmental risks of transgenic maize but linked the import, testing and
cultivation of GM corn to neoliberal policies that undermine the livelihoods of small-scale
farmers such as trade liberalization, cuts to rural subsidies, the further commercialization of the
seed, the deepening of an agro-industrial model for agriculture, and a lack of political
transparency. For example, an activist from the National Support Center for Indigenous
Missions (CENAMI) 17 got up to the microphone to explain how the government views smallscale corn producers: “[the government perspective is: We don’t need peasants, nor do we
need indigenous communities. We need people that can work in the maquiladoras [factories].
This is the solution that the neoliberal government wants to propose to us.”
At the various workshops and forums I attended over the years organized by In Defense of
Maize groups, I heard environmentalists, and campesino and indigenous producers and activists
discuss GMOs as part of a broader critique of neoliberal globalization and as an issue of
“sovereignty” -- the ability to determine one’s own economic, political and cultural path at the
community, regional and national levels. Framing GMOs in this way is an example of what HoltGiménez and Shattuck (2011) call a “radical” trend in food movements that seek deep
structural changes to the food and agricultural system.
By 2007, In Defense of Maize forum participants explicitly define what they mean by food
sovereignty, highlighting autonomy and self-determination in political, cultural and economic
senses (see box below).
Declaration of the Forum for the Defense of Maize and Food Sovereignty September 13, 2007
published in La Contaminación Transgénica del Maíz en México, 2007, GEA, p. 120
For us, food sovereignty:
--Signifies the right of “los pueblos” (peoples) to self-determination
--is part of the defense of culture of our peoples (los pueblos), the defense of land and territory

16

“Demandamos que las políticas ambientales, agrícolas y alimentarias sean sustentables, justas y soberanas, que
se elaboren junto con la sociedad civil en base a la autodeterminación de los pueblos sobre sus recursos naturales,
el respeto a los derechos indígenas y campesinos, la conservación de la biodiversidad y el principio de soberanía
alimentaria.”
17
CENAMI is a non-profit based in Mexico City that works to support indigenous pastors and churches in various
regions of the country. Beyond this, their mission includes supporting indigenous projects to defend and promote
indigenous culture, territory and rights. See www.cenami.org
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 10

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

--is a fundamental element in guaranteeing political sovereignty: a people that cannot produce
its own food is highly vulnerable to dependency and subjugation. For this reason, food
sovereignty is not only a concern for peasants and indigenous peoples, but for all Mexicans.
--is the right of communities, peoples, and nations to determine their own policies on
agriculture, food, land, the economy, and the environment necessary to guarantee dietary
staples for its population, without such policies being imposed upon them by corporations and
powerful countries.
--is the required legislation and policy for agro-food production to be supplied by national
producers so that they produce enough food, with priority given to peasants and small
producers based on forms of environmentally sustainable production. This implies the right of
peasants to land, water, seed, and natural resources.
--is to enforce the human right to food, which implies access to healthy food in the amount and
quality appropriate to cultural preferences
The 2007 declaration (in box above) argues that “food sovereignty is not only a concern for
peasants and indigenous peoples, but for all Mexicans.” This is one of many instances where
the campaign frames the issue of transgenic corn and the plight of rural Mexicans in broad
terms –in the hopes of resonating beyond activist circles, with urban consumers and people
outside of Mexico. As Raj Patel points out, however, as a “big tent” concept meant to include
disparate groups and agendas, in its extreme, food sovereignty excludes almost no one, making
for strange bedfellows with competing agendas – for example, Via Campesina’s Nyéléni
declaration includes “those who produce, distribute and consume food” (Patel 2009, 666).
With their multidimensional approach to GMOs, that includes but goes beyond the question of
environmental risks, In Defense of Maize forges and deepens connections between
environmentalists, anti-neoliberal activists, peasant and indigenous groups, and concerned
scientists and academics both within and across national borders. Activists also forward a more
inclusive definition of who is considered an expert on Mexican corn: they suggest that the
appropriate experts for evaluating potential harm are not only biotechnologists and other
scientists, but consumers and Mexico’s large number of petty commodity corn producers
(Fitting 2006 b; 2011). As a symbol of place, maize represents numerous struggles that Mexico
--particularly rural Mexico-- faces under neoliberal reforms and the expansion of agribusiness.
This shift from a focus on the risks of gene flow to a broader debate does not mean that
activists discredit or disparage scientific studies or the opinion of scientists. In fact, they often
use scientific studies about gene flow to advance their cause, and some of the most public
figures in the anti-GM network are now scientists, such as members of the Union of Concerned
Scientists Committed to Society.

MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 11

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

In my interviews, scientists who were involved in the network emphasized that they were not
against agricultural biotechnology per se, but rather against the testing and cultivation of
transgenic corn in Mexico, particularly since the traits of GM corn (which was a Bt variety
initially) are of little use there. As one maize scientist explained during the height of the
controversy: “Promoters of biotech say how wonderful it is that Bt corn was found in Oaxaca
because it’s going to help peasants. But this is incorrect because in Mexico we don’t have the
pests that Bt was designed to attack.” (Interview, Dr. José Antonio Serratos, January 28, 2002).
In Defense of Maize participants argue that transgenic maize should not be imported, tested or
cultivated in Mexico because it is the crop’s center of biodiversity and domestication. But
beyond the environmental argument about the possible effects of GMOs on criollos (native and
creolized varieties), participants ask us to consider the specific history and culture of Mexico:
they contend that transgenic maize is unsuitable, and a threat to, rural livelihoods and cultures
because of the multifaceted and profound meaning of criollo corn.
Ana de Ita, from the Center for Studies of Rural Change (CECCAM) 18 is an activist based in
Mexico City who was involved in the network right from the beginning. In an interview she
explained what she saw as the successes of the anti-GM campaign:
We [CECCAM] were involved in organizing workshops, making links between
different groups, testing corn for evidence of transgenes, outreach to rural
communities. I think one of the successes of In Defense of Maize campaign [and
network] is the level of indigenous involvement. Communities wanted to know
how to protect their seed. Another success is the pressure we put on DICONSA [a
government agency that distributes food to rural communities] to stop buying
corn imports that included transgenic corn. […] Another success is the level of
public awareness on the issue. Not to the extent that we wanted, but still the
issue is out there.” (July 24, 2006).
Despite the efforts of anti-GM activists, the moratorium on field trials of transgenic corn ended
in 2009. Since the end of the moratorium, six permits have been granted to corporations to
grow pilot plots of transgenic corn in northern Mexico (2 in Sinaloa, 4 in Tamaulipas).
Corporations and research institutes are required to first plant experimental plots on less than
1 hectare and destroy all the corn produced. They are then allowed to grow pilot plots of 10
18

CECCAM is a Mexican non-profit founded in 1992. It is a link (punto de enlace) for exchanging information and
research. It services campesinos and indigenous groups from distinct backgrounds in sharing experiences and
challenges in confronting rural modernization. See ceccam.org
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 12

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

hectares if their experimental plots show they did not harm the environment or contaminate
native varieties. The next phase is commercial planting.
As of mid-2013, the commercial cultivation of transgenic maize is still prohibited. However,
there have been reports of farmers growing transgenic maize illegally in the north for several
years (Center for Latin American and Border Studies 2009). And Monsanto, Dow Chemical, and
DuPont's Pioneer seed unit have all applied to enlarge their small experimental plots of
transgenic corn, with the goal of planting the first commercial plots in northern Mexico shortly
(Reuters, Sept 19, 2011). Monsanto and Pioneer have filed applications to plant 1.4 million
hectares in Sinaloa and over 1 million hectares in Tamaulipus (GRAIN 2012: 3). Mexican activists
and their international supporters have been intensifying their efforts to garner support for a
government rejection of these corporate applications to grow transgenic corn. Oaxacan
farmers’ organizations have declared 2013 the year of resistance to transgenic corn. Corn
continues to dominate the debates over biotechnology in Mexico. Other transgenic crops like
cotton have been grown in the country without the same level of public attention or concern.
While Mexican activists organize protests, press conferences and letters of protest calling for
the rejection of commercial production of transgenic maize, Colombia had a record year for the
planting of transgenic corn, reaching close to 50,000 hectares during the first half of 2012
(Birkett 2012).
Semillas de Identidad: anti-GM activism in Colombia
“More than 300 hundred leaders and Zenú indigenous authorities of 177 town councils
(cabildos) […] the Association of Artisans of San Andrés de Sotavento and the
Agroecology Network of the Caribbean (Recar); and the educational institutions,
teachers and students, of the Zenú resguardo met on October 6 and 7, 2005 in San
Andrés Sotavento, and made the following resolutions:
Taking into consideration that:
[…] Colombia, especially in the Caribbean, is an important center of biological
diversity for maize and other plants, where an enormous diversity of corn races
and criollos exist, the fruit of the collective labour of thousands of generations of
agriculturalists, who have developed these varieties adapted to different regions
and cultural, socio-economic and agricultural conditions. […] For the indigenous
communities of the Zenú, maize is a fundamental element, a pillar of our
culture, our productive systems and the food sovereignty [soberanía
alimentaría] of our people. Based on the above considerations, we declare:

MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 13

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

‘Our indigenous resguardo, Córdoba and Sucre, to be Territories Free of
Transgenics’”
--Zenú Declaration of their Territory as Transgenic Free, Resguardo
indígena Zenú Córdoba y Sucre, Colombia (October 7, 2005; my
translation and bold emphasis)
The first indigenous resguardo in Colombia to declare itself a Transgenic Free Territory (TFT)
was San Andrés de Sotavento, of the northern departments of Córdoba and Sucre in 2005. This
Zenú territory is also home to the Caribbean Agroecology Network (Red Agroecologíca del
Caribe or RECAR), which has been the driving force behind the national “Seeds of Identity”
campaign to promote the conservation and exchange of criollo varieties of seed in Colombia.
Initiated in 2002, the Campaign is the work of RECAR, the Bogotá office of SwissAid, and the
Colombian NGO Grupo Semillas (the Seed Group). These non-profits are the most active groups
in Colombia who challenge the cultivation of GMOs, the privatization and commercialization of
seed, and promote saving and exchanging criollo varieties. In their declaration (excerpted
above), the Zenú point to Colombia as a center of biological diversity of maize and its cultural,
alimentary, and socio-economic importance for the Zenú. They also contend that the import of
transgenic maize and other products from the United States generate “negative impacts on our
seeds, our agriculture and our food sovereignty.” Since the declaration, there have been at
least five other declared TFTs: in the resguardo of Cañamomo y Lomaprieta in Caldas; the
Municipio de Natagaima in the Resguardo Indígena de Palma Alta, Tolima; in a resguardo of la
Guajira; and two in Huila (Interview, Mauricio García A., April 12, 2012; Interview with Orlando
Pamo, February 11, 2012).
The Zenú began the process of declaring their resguardo --a territory of approximately 20,000
hectares19-- “free of transgenics” more than a decade ago when they started an initiative to
recuperate criollos, particularly maize. They also worked on developing the Seeds of Identity
campaign with the Bogotá office of SwissAid. In this campaign, native varieties of maize are a
marker of place –indigenous, rural Colombia. Representatives of the Zenú see corn as
embodying the essence of their way of life. The 2005 TFT Declaration states “We conserve and
cultivate twenty-five criollo varieties of corn, and possess an ample culinary culture based on
this sacred food; for these reasons, we consider ourselves ‘children of corn.’” Activist
publications similarly portray maize as the heart of indigenous Colombia, representative of
indigenous culture, peoples, and biological/productive resources (see RECAR website; Grupo
Semillas’ magazine Semillas (no. 22/23) from November 2004).

19

The Zenú have colonial title to approximately 67,000 hectares of land but they have recuperated only 20,000
hectares of non-contiguous parcels, located in municipalities such as Córdoba and Sucre.
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 14

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

In their 2005 Declaration against GMOs, the Zenú discuss food sovereignty as a goal that
requires the political will of leaders at all levels. They also state that since 1990, the Zenú have
begun to recuperate criollo seed in an effort to strengthen their food sovereignty, and to slow
the advance of the agroindustrial model of production. 20 Here we again see a critique of GMOs
linked to a rejection of the agro-industry and the neoliberal model of production.
Similar to how Mexican activists portray maize as sovereignty (at various levels or scales), the
Zenú declaration states that maize is a “pillar” of food sovereignty, in this case, for their local
indigenous communities: “For the indigenous communities of the Zenú, maize is a fundamental
element, a pillar of our culture, our productive systems and the food sovereignty of our
people.”
By speaking about their experiences and strategies in declaring their territory transgenic free at
regional and national indigenous congresses, the Zenú have provided an example to other
indigenous communities in Colombia. For example, when I asked Efren who was involved in
declaring his resguardo in Caldas a TFT, why it was important to make this declaration, he
explained:
Because of the loss of our seed, the introduction of technical packages [of
improved seed], and the lack of respect for our traditions and regulations
(normas) we decided to shut the door to this seed. In 2007 or so, the mayor’s
office received a proposal for technical extension work [from a seed company] to
establish some parcels of land with transgenic soybeans. This was taking
advantage of indigenous peoples’ need. The packet included everything for the
producer [initially at no charge…] The first TFT was in Córdoba [and Sucre] and
we talked to the Zenú about their experience. We had heard about their
declaration through the indigenous network and congress. The campaign Seeds
of Identity also helped us a lot. It was a difficult process [because our mayor was
initially against the idea]. It generated a discussion in the community about what
is a gene, what is improved seed. And when it understood, the community
helped with the process [of declaring a TFT]. We started to promote seed
exchanges, and at all of our meetings we started to put aside an hour to

20

“La soberanía alimentaria es, para el pueblo zenú, una meta; para ello es necesario contar con la voluntad
política de sus líderes, en todos los niveles, local, municipal y regional, mediante la implementación de acciones
[…] a principios de 1990 el pueblo zenú inció un proceso de recuperación de las semillas criollas para fortalecer la
soberanía alimentaria, y controlar el avance de los modelos de producción agroindustrial.” (Zenú Declaration 2005
14; 17 )

MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 15

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

exchange seed. According to our internal norm of 2009, the use of improved
seed [including GM varieties] is now prohibited. (Interview, February 2012).
In addition to mentioning how his community heard about the first TFT in Córdoba, among the
Zenú, Efren points to concerns about the displacement of traditional seed, and the attempts of
seed companies to “take advantage of indigenous necessity” by offering technical packages of
transgenic soy at no or low cost. Although producers from Efren’s home in Caldas first learned
about GMOs through offers of transgenic soy, anti-GM activists from indigenous resguardos like
his, and in Bogota, have focused on corn as the key crop in their campaigns. For indigenous
groups, maize is a much more traditionally meaningful crop than soy, and as I discuss below,
several pivotal activists in the anti-GM campaign in Colombia looked to the Mexican campaign
for information and strategy.
The Zenú TFT declaration in 2005 had an impact beyond setting an example for other
indigenous groups. Because their declaration preceded any government approval of transgenic
corn, when ICA did decide to approve “controlled plots” of Monsanto and Dupont varieties of
transgenic corn in 2007, they took the declaration into consideration: ICA approved GM maize
under the condition that it would not be grown in indigenous resguardos and must be grown
with a minimum distance of 300 meters from any resguardo. However, activists are concerned
about the growth in area of these controlled plots: from 6,000 hectares in 2007 to 50,000 in the
first half of 2012 (Interview Germán Vélez, December 15, 2011, Birkett 2012).
Corn: as a transnational activist strategy
“Corn is cultivated by indigenous peoples, and in reality by most rural peoples […] It is the most
traditional crop. […] corn is, let’s say, because of its reproductive cycle, its cultural importance,
for the foods made from it, for all of these factors plus the threat of transgenic seeds, it
became a strategic crop.” Mauricio García A. SwissAid, Bogotá, April 27, 2012 (translation and
emphasis mine)
As Mauricio from SwissAid Colombia explains above, maize “became a strategic crop” in the
Colombian campaign against transgenic agriculture because of its cultural importance as a key
food and crop. Following the height of the controversy over transgenic corn in Mexico,
Mauricio along with Edenia Montaño, a leader from RECAR, and indigenous leaders from the
Zenú territory travelled to Mexico to learn about the experience of indigenous peoples with the
issue, through the work of a non-governmental social justice organization called the National
Support Center for Indigenous Missions (CENAMI). The “contamination” of corn and anti-GM
campaign in Mexico struck a chord with activists and indigenous leaders in Colombia, where

MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 16

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

maize is also central to rural livelihoods. Mexican activists tell a compelling story about why
transgenic corn is inappropriate technology, and too great a risk for Mexico.
Transnational advocacy and activist networks exchange information and strategies in an effort
to influence policy at the international level as well as in specific countries, and to try and
“transform the terms and nature of the debate.” (Keck and Sikkink 1999: 93). Often these
connections are made between groups from the global south and north (ibid). While anti-GM
organizing in Mexico, and to a lesser extent, Colombia, has involved many organizations based
in the global north (such as the ETC Group, Greenpeace, SwissAid), the case of transgenic corn
raises the issue of how information is shared among activists from the global south. Colombian
and Mexican activists discussed and shared perspectives and studies on the perceived risks
associated with transgenic crops, details about their regulation in the two countries and
internationally, and strategies for raising awareness and organizing campaigns. The Mexican
focus on maize as a symbol of place –its people, culture, and biological resources --clearly
resonated with activists in Colombia. In turn, the Zenú declaration of a TFT provided an
example to other Colombian indigenous groups.
Following Keck and Sikkink’s terms, there are two kinds of politics relevant to understanding
the debates over transgenic maize in both countries under discussion. The first is “information
politics” or when activist groups try and influence public debate in the media both at home and
abroad by moving “politically usable information quickly and credibly to where it will have the
most impact.” And “symbolic politics” or the “ability to call upon symbols, actions or stories
that make sense of the situation or claim for an audience that is frequently far away [..].” (1999:
95).
The cultural and symbolic significance of maize in parts of Colombia, much like in Mexico, is
deeply connected to the everyday experience and livelihood struggles of rural peoples. Activists
point out that Colombia is home to a considerable diversity of criollo varieties, and that these
varieties are put at risk by policies which undermine small-scale agricultural production and the
free exchange of seed, and foster import dependency. Colombia went from being self-sufficient
in maize in the 1990s to importing some 85 percent of corn for domestic consumption in
2010 21; much of the imported corn is transgenic. Mexican activists had also highlighted this
connection between GMOs, trade liberalization and increasing corn imports in their country
based on their experience with the North American Free Trade Agreement (Fitting 2006a).
When activist groups use international contacts and networks that reach across regions and
countries to advance their cause, this can have what Keck and Sikkink call a “boomerang
21

Germán Vélez, Interview, December 15, 2011.
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 17

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

pattern” or effect; these campaigns and contacts can turn around and put pressure on those
national governments who had been previously unresponsive to the group’s cause.
On the one hand, the Colombian anti-GM campaign has had an impact on regulation –as
mentioned above ICA qualified its approval of transgenic corn with the stipulation that its
cultivation must be accompanied by a buffer zone, and it is prohibited in resguardos. On the
other hand, in interviews, activists and a representative from the pro-biotechnology advocacy
group (the Colombian office of AgroBIO) confirmed my observation that the issue of GMOs is
not discussed or debated much in public forums. Media coverage in Colombia on agricultural
biotechnology is sparse and often positive (with the exception of activist publications and
websites).
No doubt one factor in this sparse media coverage and public debate over GMOs is the level of
concern and coverage about the on-going armed conflict in rural Colombia. In comparison to
the effects of armed conflict, the issue of GMO cultivation can seem minor; it is a challenge for
anti-GM activists to generate support for their cause outside of activist circles or indigenous
resguardos. A form of “biohegemony” may also be at work in which “the benefits and value of
agricultural biotechnology acquire the status of common sense and go largely unquestioned”
(Newell 2009: 38). 22 Additionally, as I have suggested above, the focus on maize as an anti-GM
strategy may not speak to Colombians beyond activist, indigenous and campesino communities
to the extent it does in Mexico. GMOs have generated more critical press coverage and
mobilizations in Mexico than in Colombia, where images of Mexico as a people and culture of
corn resonate beyond activist networks, and Mexican activists regularly publish research and
opinion pieces in national newspapers (notably, but not restricted to the leftist La Jornada).
The comparison between Mexico and Colombia is interesting not only because it shows how
key symbols and activist strategies can resonate to differing degrees in different places, but also
because ideas and networks around food justice are built between groups from the global

22

Mexican anti-GM activists have been successful in challenging the alignments between the biotech industry and
the government, along with their discursive strategies promoting genetically engineered crops – or what Peter
Newell (2009) has called, in the Argentine case, “biohegemony.” Based on his research in Argentina -- where the
benefits of GMOs are largely taken for granted in the media, with relatively little activist campaigning around the
issue—Newell argues that a form of “biohegemony” is at work, or “an alignment of material, institutional and
discursive power which sustains a coalition of forces [that] benefit from the prevailing model of agricultural
development.” (p. 38). In Mexico, I argue, In Defense of Maize challenges the institutional arrangements and
discourses that foment agricultural biotechnology by suggesting that the regulation of transgenic corn must be
contextualized in relation to the broader challenges facing campesinos and the Mexican countryside under
neoliberal globalization. (see Fitting, 2012)
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 18

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

south rather than just between global north and south.23 “Globalization from below” refers to
the transnational “linking of knowledge and political action in hundreds of civic initiatives (Falk
1997: 19) which challenge what is sometimes referred to as “globalization from above” or the
neoliberal policies of international institutions and national governments, and the influence of
transnational corporations.
Conclusion
Resistance to agricultural biotechnology (as well as support for it) is found in many different
countries around the world, but why and how it is resisted (or supported) may differ. While
Colombian and Mexican activists share concerns and strategies with anti-GM activists
internationally, their campaigns strategically focus on maize as a powerful symbol of their
region, its peoples, and distinct cultures. This focus on maize as a symbol of cultural difference
lapses into romanticized and ahistorical portrayals of peasantries and indigenous communities,
but it also illustrates how activists in the global south engage food sovereignty as more than a
big tent concept; it is a concept that highlights the importance of place and a multidimensional,
even radical, critique of neoliberal globalization.
In Mexico and Colombia, activists oppose transgenic seeds, particularly transgenic maize,
because of its potentially harmful effects on criollos and campesino and indigenous livelihoods.
Activists explicitly take up “food sovereignty” as a concept and approach in their debates,
forums, and declarations, highlighting the call for rural producers to have control over their
productive resources --to have the ability to pursue rural futures if they so choose-- and for the
voices and opinions of rural producers to have weight in government and supra-national
decisions about agriculture, resources, and trade.
Beyond the rejection of GMOs for environmental, food safety, or ethical reasons and as part of
a desire to preserve rural society –issues highlighted in early anti-GM campaigns in Western
Europe, for example (Schurman 2003)-- these Colombian and Mexican activists oppose GMOs,
and transgenic corn in particular, as part of a broader critique of how neoliberal globalization
undermines sovereignty. In other words, the appeal of food sovereignty is that it focuses our
attention on questions of sovereignty –on how to advance or protect economic, political and
cultural self-determination and autonomy, at various levels and spheres.
Although the focus on maize has different degrees of success and resonance in Mexico and
Colombia, I hope the comparison serves as a reminder to consider why and how activists
23

Although some large transnational organizations like Greenpeace and SwissAid are important actors in these
anti-GM campaigns, they have offices in Mexico and Colombia, staffed by locals.
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 19

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

oppose GMOs and take up “food sovereignty” in different places. These campaigns against
transgenic corn also provide insight into how indigenous maize farmers and campesinos, along
with professional activists in urban Colombia and Mexico, help shape “globalization from
below” by the sharing information and strategies through networks between regions and
countries of the global south.

Acknowledgements:
Over the years I have relied on the insights of countless individuals in Mexico, for which I am
very grateful. In Colombia, I would like to thank my interviewees, particularly Mauricio García
Alvarez and Germán Alonso Vélez. Finally I would also thank Carole Counihan, Lindsay DuBois,
Liesl Gambold, and Valeria Siniscalchi for feedback on sections of this paper. All errors are, of
course, my own.

MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 20

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

References
ABColombia (Christian Aid, CAFOD, Oxfam GB, SCIAF, Trócaire) (2010). Caught in the Crossfire:
Colombia’s Indigenous Peoples, Report. London. October,
2010.http://www.abcolombia.org.uk/downloads/Caught_in_the_Crossfire.pdf
Alvarez-Morales, A. (1999). ‘Mexico: Ensuring Environmental Safety While Benefiting from
Biotechnology,’ Agricultural Biotechnology and the Poor, ed. Gabrielle J. Persley and
Manuel M. Lantin, Washington: Consultative Group on International Agricultural
Research: 90–96. http://www.cgiar.org/biotech/rep0100/Morales.pdf.
Bernstein, H. (2013) “Food sovereignty: A skeptical view” for Food Sovereignty: a critical
dialogue conference, Program in Agrarian Studies, Yale University, Sept 14-15.
--(2009) “Agrarian questions from transition to globalization” pp. 239-261 in eds. H. AkramLodhi and C. Kay, Peasants and Globalization: Political economy, rural transformation
and the agrarian question London: Routledge.
Birkett, R. (2012), ‘Colombia plants record GM maize area’ Agrow, August 29. Available at
http://www.agrow.com/markets/southamerica
Center for Latin American and Border Studies (2009), ‘NAFTA Commission Gets GM Corn
Complaint,’ Frontera NorteSur (on-line news), New Mexico State University Las Cruces,
January 29.
Chapela, I. and D. Quist (2001), ‘Trangenic DNA Introgressed into Traditional Maize Landraces in
Oaxaca, Mexico,’ Nature 414, no. 6863, 541–43.
Cleveland, D., D. Soleri, and F. Aragon (2003), ‘Transgenes on the move’ Paper presented at the
American Anthropology Association Meetings in Chicago, Friday, November 21, 2003.
Session 2-097
Ezcurra, E., S. Ortiz and J. Soberón (2002), ‘Evidence of Gene Flow From Transgenic Maize to
Local Varieties in Mexico’, in LMOs and the Environment: Proceedings of an International
Conference, OECD. Raleigh-Durham, the United States, 27-30 November 2001: 277-283.
Falk, R. (1997), ‘Resisting “Globalisation-from-Above” Through “Globalisation-from –Below”’,
New Political Economy, 2 (1): 17-24.
Federación Nacional de Cultivadores de Cereales y Leguminosas (Fenalce) (2011), ‘Plan MaízPaís’ El Cerealista (Magazine), No. 96: 4-7. Available at:
http://www.fenalce.org/pagina.php?p_a=25 (accessed December 12, 2012)
Fitting, E. (2006a), ‘Importing corn, exporting labor: The neoliberal corn regime, GMOs, and the
erosion of biodiversity in Mexico’ Agriculture and Human Values 23: 15-26.
Fitting, E. (2006b), ‘The political uses of culture: maize production & the GM corn
debates in Mexico’, Focaal, European Journal of Anthropology 48: 17-34.
Fitting, E. (2011), Struggle for Maize: Campesinos, Workers and Transgenic Corn in the Mexican
Countryside, Durham: Duke University Press.
MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 21

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

Fitting, E. (2012) “Risk, regulation, and resistance in the on-going debate over genetically
modified (GM) corn in Mexico” AAA, January.
Fitting, E. (forthcoming 2014) “Cultures of Corn and Anti-GMO Activism in Mexico and
Colombia” in eds. Carole Counihan and Valeria Siniscalchi’s Food Activism: Agency,
Democracy and Economy, NY: Bloomsbury
González, R. (2001), Zapotec Science: Farming and Food in the Northern Sierra of Oaxaca.
Austin: University of Texas Press.
GRAIN (2012), Red Alert! GMO Avalanche in Mexico. Report, November 2012. Available at
http://www.grain.org/article/entries/4621-red-alert-gmo-avalanche-in-mexico
(accessed January 30, 2012).
Harvey, D. (2003), The New Imperialism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heller, C. (2002), ‘From Scientific Risk to Paysan Savoir-Faire: Peasant Expertise in the French
and Global Debate over GM Crops’, Science as Culture 11(1):5-37.
Holt Giménez, E. and A. Shattuck 2011 “Food Crises, food regimes and food movements:
rumblings of reform or tides of transformation?” Journal of Peasant Studies 38 (1): 109144.
INE-CONABIO (2002), ‘Evidencias de flujo genético desde fuentes de maíz transgénico hacia
variedades criollas’ Presented by E. Huerta at the En Defensa Del Maíz Conference,
January 23, 2002, Mexico City.
International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications (ISAAA) (2011), ‘Global
Status of Commercialized Biotech/GM Crops: 2011’, Brief 43-2011, Available at:
http://www.isaaa.org/resources/publications/briefs/43/executivesummary/default.asp
(Accessed April 9, 2012).
Keck, M. and Sikkink, K. (1999), ‘Transnational advocacy networks in international and regional
politics’, International Social Science Journal, 51 (159): 89-101.
Kloppenburg, J. (1988), First the Seed: the Political Economy of Plant Biotechnology, 1492-2000,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McMichael, P. (2006), ‘Peasant prospects in the neoliberal age’, New Political Economy 11 (3):
407- 418.
Müller, B. (2006), ‘Introduction: GMOs –global objects of contention’, Focaal—European
Journal of Anthropology 48 (2006): 3–16.
Newell, P. (2009), ‘Bio-Hegemony: The Political Economy of Agricultural Biotechnology in
Argentina’, Journal of Latin American Studies 41: 27–57.
National Research Council of the National Academies (NRC) (2002), Environmental Effects of
Transgenic Plants: The Scope and Adequacy of Regulation. Washington: National
Academies Press.
Patel, R. (2009), “What does food sovereignty look like?” The Journal of Peasant Studies 26 (3):
663-673

MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 22

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

Pearson, T. (2009), ‘On the Trail of Genetically Modified Organisms: Environmentalism Within
and Against the Neoliberal Order’, Cultural Anthropology 24 (4): 712-745.
Pechlaner, G. and G. Otero (2008), ‘The third food regime: neoliberal globalism and agricultural
biotechnology in North America’, Sociologia Ruralis 48 (4): 1-21.
Pilcher, J. (1998), !Que vivan los tamales! Food and the Making of Mexican Identity.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Quist, D. and I. H. Chapela (2002), ‘Biodiversity (Communications Arising (Reply)): Suspect
Evidence of Transgenic Contamination/Maize Transgene Results in Mexico Are
Artefacts,’ Nature 416, no. 6881, 602.
Rodriguez, C.M. (2011) , ‘Mexico Corn Imports to Surge to Record as Output Outlook Cut’
Bloomberg News, Aug 12, 2011
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-08-12/mexico-corn-imports-to-surge-to-record-asoutput-outlook-cut-2-.html.
Resguardo indígena Zenú Córdoba y Sucre, Colombia (2005), ‘Declaración del resguardo
indígena Zenú, Córdoba y Sucre, como Territorio Libre de Trasngénicos’, San Andrés de
Sotavento, October 7 2005.
Reuters (2011). ‘More than 10 permits sought again for pilot projects’, September 19, 2011.
Schurman, R. (2003). ‘Introduction. Biotechnology in the New Millennium’, in R. Schurman and
D. Doyle Takahashi Kelso (eds), Engineering Trouble. Biotechnology and its Discontents,
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Serratos, J. A. (1996) ‘Evaluation of Novel Crop Varieties in Their Center of Origin and Diversity:
The Case of Maize in Mexico.’ Turning Priorities into Feasible Programs. Proceedings of a
Policy Seminar on Agricultural Biotechnology for Latin America, Lima, Peru, 6–10
October 1996. Agricultural Biotechnology Policy Seminars no. 4, 68–73.
Soleri, D., D. A. Cleveland, F. Aragón, M. R. Fuentes, H. Ríos, and S. H. Sweeney (2005),
‘Understanding the potential impact of transgenic crops in traditional agriculture: Maize
farmers’ perspectives in Cuba, Guatemala, and Mexico’, Environmental Biosafety
Research 4 (3): 141–166.
Turrent Fernández, A., R. Alvadeño Salazar, R. Moreno Dahme (1997). “Análysis de las
posibilidades técnicas de la autosuficiencia sostenible de maíz en México” TERRA 14, no.
4, 445-68.
Turrent Fernández, A., T. A. Wise, and E. Garvey (2012), Achieving Mexico’s Maize Potential.
Global Development and Environment Institute Working Paper No. 12-03. October
2012. Medford, MA: Tufts University.
USDA (2012), Economic Research Service ‘Genetically engineered (GE) corn varieties by State
and United States, 2000-2012’ Accessed August 14, 2012.
http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/adoption-of-genetically-engineered-crops-in-theus.aspx

MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 23

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE - CONFERENCE PAPER #18

Warman, A. (2003 [1988]), Corn and Capitalism. How a Botanical Bastard Grew to Global
Dominance, translated by Nancy Westrate, Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina
Press.
Wittman, H, A. A. Desmarais and N. Wiebe (2010), Food Sovereignty: Reconnecting Food,
Nature and Community, Halifax, NS: Fernwood Publishing.

MAIZE AS SOVEREIGNTY: ANTI-GM ACTIVISM IN MEXICO AND COLOMBIA

-

PAGE 24

FOOD SOVEREIGNTY: A CRITICAL DIALOGUE
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE PAPER SERIES
Food Sovereignty:
A Critical Dialogue
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE
YALE UNIVERSITY
SEPTEMBER 14-15, 2013

http://www.yale.edu/agrarianstudies/foodsovereignty/index.html

A fundamentally contested concept, food sovereignty has — as a political project
and campaign, an alternative, a social movement, and an analytical framework —
barged into global agrarian discourse over the last two decades. Since then, it has
inspired and mobilized diverse publics: workers, scholars and public intellectuals,
farmers and peasant movements, NGOs and human rights activists in the North
and global South. The term has become a challenging subject for social science
research, and has been interpreted and reinterpreted in a variety of ways by various groups and individuals. Indeed, it is a concept that is broadly defined as the
right of peoples to democratically control or determine the shape of their food
system, and to produce sufficient and healthy food in culturally appropriate and
ecologically sustainable ways in and near their territory. As such it spans issues
such as food politics, agroecology, land reform, biofuels, genetically modified organisms (GMOs), urban gardening, the patenting of life forms, labor migration,
the feeding of volatile cities, ecological sustainability, and subsistence rights.
Sponsored by the Program in Agrarian Studies at Yale University and the
Journal of Peasant Studies, and co-organized by Food First, Initiatives in Critical Agrarian Studies (ICAS) and the International Institute of Social Studies
(ISS) in The Hague, as well as the Amsterdam-based Transnational Institute
(TNI), the conference “Food Sovereignty: A Critical Dialogue” will be held at
Yale University on September 14–15, 2013. The event will bring together
leading scholars and political activists who are advocates of and sympathetic to the idea of food sovereignty, as well as those who are skeptical to the
concept of food sovereignty to foster a critical and productive dialogue on
the issue. The purpose of the meeting is to examine what food sovereignty
might mean, how it might be variously construed, and what policies (e.g. of
land use, commodity policy, and food subsidies) it implies. Moreover, such
a dialogue aims at exploring whether the subject of food sovereignty has
an “intellectual future” in critical agrarian studies and, if so, on what terms.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Elizabeth (Liz) Fitting is an anthropologist and associate professor at Dalhousie University in Halifax, Canada. She is the author of The Struggle for Maize: Campesinos, Workers, and Transgenic Corn in the Mexican Countryside (2011) and a forthcoming chapter in Food Activism:
Agency, Democracy and Economy (2014), which compares anti-GM activism in Colombia and Mexico. Her email is: elizabeth.fitting@dal.ca
 Justin Dammann walks a terrace between soybean fields on his Page County farmland. The Dammann family continues to invest in terracing of their fields to stop runoff and reduce soil erosion. 
 Christopher Gannon/The Register 
 WASHINGTON – When Justin Dammann enters his southwestern Iowa cornfield this month, the 35-year-old farmer will sow something these 2,400 acres have not seen in more than a decade — plants grown without genetically modified seeds. 
 The corn, which will head to a processor 20 miles down the road this fall, will likely make its way into tortilla shells, corn chips and other consumable products made by companies taking advantage of growing consumer demand for food without biotech ingredients. 
 For Dammann and other Midwest farmers, the burgeoning interest in non-GMO foods has increased how much they get paid to grow crops in fields once populated exclusively with genetically modified corns and soybeans. The revenue hike is a welcome benefit at a time when lower commodity prices are pushing farm income down to what's expected to be the lowest level in six years. 
 "We never really thought we would go back to (non-GMO). But the consumer, in my opinion, has sent a clear message that a certain percentage of our customers are willing to pay more for the non-GMO lines," Dammann said. "This non-GMO thing has seemed to take hold and gain a lot of traction." 
 RELATED: Harvest of Change: Farmers' views vary widely on weeds 
 Consumers, particularly on the West and East coasts, have demanded more GMO-free products because of health and safety concerns. And a number of major food companies have responded. 
 • General Mills announced last year it will no longer use bioengineered cornstarch and sugar cane for its original Cheerios. 
 • Chipotle Mexican Grill, the rapidly growing taco and burrito chain, is working to eliminate GMOs from its ingredients. 
 • And Whole Foods will require labeling of all products sold in its U.S. and Canadian stores by 2018 to indicate whether they contain genetically modified ingredients. 
 Justin Dammann cuts hay in a field on a Page County farm on July 3, 2014. 
 Christopher Gannon/The Register 
 Last year, retail sales of products verified by the Non-GMO Project — the top U.S. certification organization — rose to $8.5 billion, compared with $1.2 billion three years earlier. Despite the torrid growth, it marked a fraction of the $630 billion in total supermarket sales in 2014 estimated by Progressive Grocer Magazine. 
 RELATED: Bill backs voluntary label identifying GMO-free foods | Natural foods market to open in Clive 
 Tim Daley, an agronomist at Stonebridge Ltd., said the Cedar Falls company is getting flooded with calls from income-hungry farmers all over the Midwest looking for crops such as non-GMOs that could pay them a premium for their corn and soybeans. 
 Recently, a farmer growing a non-GMO soybean crop could get as much as $2 a bushel for soybeans and $0.35 a bushel for corn over the market price. Daley estimated growers could save $150 for each bag of corn seed they buy that lacks the traits embedded in genetically modified crops, a difference that could help a farmer reach profitability. 
 Stonebridge works with major food producers that manufacture energy bars, veggie burgers, soy milk and other products from non-GMO and other niche crops to ensure there will be enough grown by farmers to meet demand. 
 "Usually I don't turn people away, and I'm making the calls trying to find the acres," Daley said. But with lower grain prices "all my acres are filled, as far as my needs go, and I'm pretty much turning farmers away because the demand for the food-grade side hasn't increased as fast as the interest to produce them." 
 The overwhelming majority of corn and soybean crops in the Corn Belt, including Iowa, are grown using genetically modified crops. 
 Producers have embraced the crops — first commercially introduced in the United States in 1996 with the launch of Monsanto's Roundup Ready soybeans — because they boost yields and reduce the need for costly chemicals to rebuff bugs and weeds. 
 Last year, an estimated 97 percent of soybeans and 95 percent of corn grown in Iowa were from biotech seeds, figures that were both higher than the national average. 
 Justin Dammann walks a section of food-grade white corn growing on his family's Page County farm near Clarinda on July 2, 2014. The family raises food-grade white and yellow corn for the Minsa Corporation in Red Oak, a corn flour mill that ships the milled corn nationwide. 
 Christopher Gannon/The Register 
 DuPont Pioneer, based in Johnston, Ia., said the agri-business giant best known for its genetically modified seeds hasn't wavered in its support for non-GMO products. Pioneer, which touts itself as the largest seller of non-GMO corn and soybean seeds, estimates about 4 percent of its soybean seed sales and 5 percent of its corn are non-GMO. 
 Morrie Bryant, senior marketing manager at DuPont Pioneer, said the company views non-GMO seeds as a niche product. 
 "We're very involved in traits, and we believe in traits and the importance of traits, but we also believe in the importance of offering choice. We certainly believe that non-GMOs aren't going to leave us. It's going to endure," Bryant said. "There is a domestic demand for non-GMO, albeit pretty small right now." 
 Exactly how many acres of non-GMO crops are grown in the United States for food is difficult to estimate because it is a specialized product and often contracted out to meet changing demand by food manufacturers. Further growth for non-GMO corn and soybeans could come if more livestock producers move toward raising chickens and hogs given GM-free feed. If it comes to fruition, those involved with non-GMO seeds are optimistic more land would go toward animal feed than is going for products found on supermarket shelves. 
 As much as 80 percent of packaged foods contain ingredients that have been genetically modified, according to the Grocery Manufacturers Association, which represents more than 300 food and beverage companies, including Kellogg and H.J. Heinz. 
 RELATED: Global food prices lowest in 5 years, U.N. says 
 Some environmental and consumer groups have expressed doubt about the safety of genetically modified ingredients, even though the Food and Drug Administration, the National Academy of Sciences and other regulatory and scientific bodies have said there is no difference between genetically modified crops and their traditional counterparts. 
 Farmers across much of the Corn Belt are struggling to stay profitable as prices for maize, soybeans and other crops have plunged below the cost of production for some growers. 
 Wayne Hoener, vice president of sales for eMerge Genetics, said sales of the West Des Moines company's proprietary non-GMO seed products have tripled since 2012. This year, eMerge estimates about 30 percent of its sales are from new customers. Already, some of the company's 35 corn and soybean varieties are sold out. 
 "It's all about return on my acre for the producer," Hoener said. "If there is a contract that can pay them a premium for non-GMO, they are going to be very receptive to that in this day and age, particularly when commodity prices are lower." 
 Farm prices for corn have tumbled 46 percent from 2012, while soybeans have declined by about a third during the same period. 
 Justin Dammann on his family's Page County farm. 
 Register file photo 
 The plunge in commodity prices will push down farm income 32 percent this year to $73.6 billion, its lowest level since 2009, according to the Agriculture Department. 
 All this has spurred farmers to find new ways to offset lost income, making non-GMO and other niche crops even more attractive. 
 The seeds themselves cost less than their biotech counterparts, but a portion of that savings is lost because of the need to use more chemicals to protect crops. Some growers say they have little to lose by switching back to non-GMO crops because of growing resistance to weeds and pests that have developed to some herbicides, such as Monsanto's Roundup. 
 Dammann, who farms in Essex, said raising non-GMO corn does come with some added risk. 
 He not only must pay more for herbicides to combat corn borer and root worm insects, but the yields can sometimes be unpredictable if the weather is not ideal. Dammann said in some years, his yields were in line with biotech crops and in other years they fell short. 
 In 2012, when the Midwest was in its worst drought in decades, output was 30 percent less than his genetically modified corn, he said. 
 "Hopefully we deliver the right product and people are passionate to buy (GMO free) — because that is the direction we are moving," he said. 
 Non-GMO product sales 
 Retail sales of products verified by the Non-GMO Project, the top U.S. certification organization. 
 This website uses cookies to ensure you get the best experience while browsing it. By clicking 'Got It' you're accepting these terms. 
 59 Indigenous Corn Varieties at Risk as Monsanto Eyes Mexico 
 Mexico's unique and treasured native corn varieties could be under threat as Monsanto, the world's largest seed producer, vies to plant genetically modified (GMO) corn in the country. 
 In August 2015, a Mexican judged overturned a September 2013 ban on GMO corn, thus opening more business opportunities for Monsanto and other agribusinesses pending favorable later court decisions. Monsanto even announced in October 2015 that it was seeking to double its sales in the country over the next five years. 
 Chef Pancho Ibanez of Mexico City-based restaurant Pujol. He joins roughly 80 other Mexican chefs who are speaking out against GMO corn. Photo credit: Financial Times 
 The GMO corn ban remains pending a ruling on the appeal, but a final decision could end up in Mexico's supreme court. 
 Monsanto, which is seeking five permits to grow GMO corn in five areas in northern Mexico, touts that the bioengineered crop is a ticket out of poverty for small farmers since the crops purportedly result in higher yields and profits, the Financial Times reported. 
 “It’s incredible that we are not giving [small farmers] the option to cross the poverty line,” Monsanto’s chief executive for northern Latin America, Manuel Bravo told the publication. 
 He added that the controversial multinational company has trouble "communicating" its message. 
 “We’re the company that employs the most PhDs in the world after NASA. We’re good at talking to Petri dishes, but we were no good at communicating,” Bravo said. 
 However, community advocates and chefs warn that Mexico's 59 indigenous corn varieties could be under threat by GMOs. As you can see in this video from the Financial Times, the country's most noted chefs are speaking out against a possible takeover. Roughly 80 other Mexican chefs have also joined the fight against GMO corn. 
 "If we allow all these varieties of corn to be lost, we’ll lose part of our identity," said Chef Pancho Ibanez of the world-renowned Pujol in Mexico City. "It’s as if we were cutting of our feet, cutting off the roots of a tree. It’s something that could seem so simple, so basic but it’s our past, present and future." 
 According to Rabobank, the prominent Netherlands-based food and agribusiness banking company, Mexico is second largest importer of corn in the world, as well as the sixth largest producer and the sixth largest consumer of corn in the world. 
 Additionally, the bank said, Mexico has two different corn markets: one for white corn (mainly for human consumption) and the other for yellow corn (mainly for animal feed). 
 Mexico imports its yellow corn from the U.S., and since 90 percent of U.S. corn is grown from Monsanto's genetically modified seeds, this mean Monsanto is inadvertently dominating Mexico's yellow corn market. 
 EcoWatch reported in November that a staunch anti-GMO movement has swelled in the country in order to preserve the unique biodiversity of Mexico's staple crop. As the World Watch Institute wrote: 
 For years, scientists and environmental activists have been warning the Mexican government that GMOs in imported corn could harm Mexico's exceptionally rich biological and cultural diversity. The known risks of GMOs include the creation of hard-to-control weedy relatives of crops through "crop-to-wild hybridization," the development of insect pests or weeds that are resistant to the chemicals used with GMO crops, and the unintentional poisoning of beneficial insects and non-target species. 
 Aerial view of the Great Barrier Reef, a unique coral formation in Queensland, Australia. Marco Brivio / Photographer's Choice / Getty Images 
 The climate is changing faster than many species can adapt, so scientists are trying to speed up evolution by fostering the spread of creatures who can take the heat. Think of it as natural selection with a little boost from humans—or, in some cases, robots. 
 This sponsored post was brought to you by Review Critic and written by Dylan Wingate BSCPHM, RPH 
 We know by now that chronic inflammation is a culprit for almost every single disease on the planet. Even though there are many factors that drive inflammation, the food and beverages we have each day are some of the biggest culprits. Chronic inflammation affects the gut, but eventually, it also becomes systemic, which means that it affects almost every organ in the body. 
 The world's youth have finally seen and heard enough from the deplorable political process, from compromised delegates, corrupted political appointees, and criminal corporations who sabotage these critical international discussions. 
 Vancouver, British Columbia skyline with the North Shore Mountains. RonTech2000 / iStock / Getty Images Plus 
 Global warming isn't a partisan issue—or it shouldn't be. The many experts issuing dire warnings about the implications of climate disruption work under political systems ranging from liberal democracies to autocratic dictatorships, for institutions including the U.S. Department of Defense, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, and numerous business organizations and universities. 
 In 1988, when NASA scientist James Hansen reported to Congress that evidence for human-caused global warming was near undeniable, conservative politicians including the UK's Margaret Thatcher, U.S. President George H.W. Bush and Canada's Brian Mulroney agreed that action was needed. In my home province of British Columbia, a right-leaning government, the British Columbia Liberal Party, introduced a carbon tax in 2008. 
 Tribal communities across the country are disproportionally reeling from the effects of the partial government shutdown, now in its 21st day. 
 As detailed in a sobering report from The New York Times, the Chippewa in Michigan are losing $100,000 a day to fund crucial health care programs, food pantries and employees' salaries; Snow-covered roads in Navajo Nation in New Mexico, Arizona and Utah remain unplowed because federal maintenance has suspended, trapping many people in their freezing homes; Police officers on the Bois Forte Indian Reservation in Minnesota are being forced to work without pay. 
 About 35 skiffs attacked a Sea Shepherd vessel in a marine protected area in Mexico's Upper Gulf of California. Alex Beldi / Sea Shepherd 
 The environmental organization Sea Shepherd Conservation Society says its crew was attacked Wednesday by roughly 35 fishing boats inside a vaquita refuge in Mexico's Gulf of California. 
 Sea Shepherd released a video showing fishermen shouting, hurling objects and trying to foul the propellors of the M/V Farley Mowat, a Sea Shepherd vessel used in campaigns against illegal fisheries activities. 
 Marijuana regulation is well behind its legalization; there isn't really any alternative, given that research and consumer desires will shape what we know and want from the crop. 
 Does genetic modification lead to more and better crops? Or will it destroy the foundations of our food systems? 
 French farmers and activists reap what they called an "illegal" plot of genetically modified rapeseed developed by the agribusiness company Monsanto. Robert Pratta/Reuters 
 Two weeks ago, Monsanto announced the latest genetically engineered crop it hopes to bring to market: a soybean rejiggered to resist the herbicide dicamba. The new product, says Monsanto, will aid in weed control and "deliver peace of mind for growers." 
 Meanwhile, half a world away, La Via Campesina, a farmers' movement of 150 organizations from 70 countries, had a slightly different idea about what would bring peace of mind to its millions of members: protecting biodiversity. In its statement to those gathered in Bali for the United Nations treaty on plant genetics, the organization urged treaty drafters to reevaluate the legal framework that allows seed patenting and the spread of genetically engineered crops, like those Monsanto soybeans. These genetically modified crops and the international patent regime, La Via Campesina said, block farmers' ability to save and share seeds, threatening biodiversity and food security. 
 Monsanto and La Via Campesina represent two distinct worldviews. According to Monsanto and other chemical and seed giants like Syngenta, BASF, and Dupont, corporate control of seeds and relaxed laws for biotech promotion spur innovation and productivity. 
 That may sound good, but La Via Campesina and many other groups around the world look at the real-world effects of 20 years of patent approvals and the spread of biotech crops. These critics argue that corporate power over seeds has actually undermined biodiversity and food-system resilience. 
 This debate is significant. Which side we listen to will largely determine just how well we can continue to feed the planet, especially as we contend with ever greater weather extremes brought on by global warming when crop resilience will be paramount. 
 Since the 1980 Diamond v. Chakrabarty Supreme Court decision, companies in the U.S. have been able to patent life forms, including seeds. In Europe, since 1999, nearly 1,000 patents on animals and 1,500 on plants have been approved; thousands more are pending, and not just for genetically engineered crops, but for conventional ones, too. Monsanto and Syngenta alone have filed patents for dozens of conventional vegetables, including tomatoes, sweet peppers, and melons. This means tightening control on how and where certain crops can be planted and even whether certain seed lines are continued—or exterminated. 
 In contrast to what we hear from Monsanto, patents actually restrict innovation, as researchers can no longer freely use patented plants in breeding experimentation. Increasing market concentration in seed ownership has also destroyed true market competition. In 2004, half of global seed sales were controlled by 10 companies. Today, those companies control nearly three-quarters of sales. This concentration has led to higher prices and shrinking choice for consumers. 
 Add to this corporate consolidation the spread of biotech crops and you see why biodiversity is becoming so threatened. Biotech crops, like other industrial crops, are monocultures, with single varieties planted over millions of acres and sprayed with chemicals. Despite promises about wonder crops that would end Vitamin A deficiency or withstand drought, nearly all commercially available genetically modified foods are just one of two types, designed either to withstand a specific pesticide or to include a built-in pesticide. Fifty percent of all biotech crops planted worldwide are soybeans. Three countries--the United States, Brazil, and Argentina--grow 77 percent of all genetically modified crops, nearly all destined for livestock, not the world's hungry. 
 Biotech crops also affect biodiversity in ways that "traditional" industrial crops don't: by risking the genetic integrity of cultivated and wild plants. In a 2006 report, Doug Gurian-Sherman, now with the Union of Concerned Scientists, explained: "Genetic engineering ups the ante when it comes to the potential for harm to wildlife from gene flow, because organisms in natural ecosystems have not adapted to many of the genes used in field trials. With the recent approval of genetically engineered alfalfa in the United States, organic farmers here are ever more concerned about such a "genetic trespass." 
 Among biodiversity's many benefits is that it provides a reservoir of potentially essential genetic material, varieties that might be found to be more resilient in the face of more droughts and floods, for instance. Says Jack Heinemann, a professor of molecular biology at New Zealand's University of Canterbury Heinemann, "If we jeopardize this biodiversity for the sake of a possiblewonder trait for tomorrow, then we won't have any wonder traits for the day after tomorrow." 
 That's not what the biotech industry is saying. Instead, Monsanto, the world's leading manufacturer of genetically modified foods, is spending millions on a PR campaign to convince the public that its technology will be vital to meeting the world's growing food demands. In early 2009, Monsanto's biotechnology chief, Steve Padgette, claimed that new crops like its forthcoming drought-resistant corn "will reset the bar for on-farm productivity." Never mind that experts in the field say engineering drought resistance is many years off—if even possible—and that biotech crops have not delivered consistently greater yields. The International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development, a multi-year study contributed to by more than 600 experts from around the world, concluded that the benefits of agricultural biotechnology "is anecdotal and contradictory, and uncertainty about possible benefits and damage is unavoidable." 
 Meanwhile, agricultural projects from around the world—especially in drought-stricken parts of East Africa—are showing the incredible potential of sustainable farming practices. The introduction of agroecological techniques on smallholder plots in hundreds of projects throughout Africa studied by England's University of Essex brought an increase in crop yields of an average of 116 percent. As a means for improving resiliency and sustainability within the global food chain, agroecology is now supported by a "wide range of experts within the scientific community," said Olivier de Schutter, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to food. 
 Back in Bali, La Via Campesina described its farmer members as being in the midst of a "war for control over seeds." Strong language, yes. But if we don't heed the organization's call for stricter regulation of the biotech and seed industry, biodiversity may just become collateral damage. 
 We want to hear what you think about this article. Submit a letter to the editor or write to letters@theatlantic.com. 
 To the federal government of Mexico:To the people of Mexico: 
 We have analyzed almost two decades of experience with GMO maize crops in other countries and there is not a single technological, economic or ethical reason in benefit of the Mexican population nor of the majority of rural producers, that justifies the imminent authorization of commercial planting of GMO maize in Mexico. Yet there are at least one million hectares being planned by Monsanto and Pioneer, in Sinaloa and Tamaulipas states in northern Mexico. Rather, the proposed coomercial liberation of GMO maize presents immense dangers to human health, biodiversity, culture and to our national sovereignty. 
 The transnational corporations are shamelessly looking to increase their profits through the pillage of our natural resources, even at the cost of peoples’ health, aided by official corruption and criminal acts, and this is particularly true for the companies dedicated to the production and industrialization of food. 
 The degree to which the federal government of Mexico, in the hands of expresident Felipe Calderon, working alongside the multinational companies that have been taking over the agro-food production in Mexico, trampled over the interests of consumers in the city and the countryside, and peasants and small producers in the countryisde, was unexpected, and put the agro-genetic heritage of our country at risk. 
 Despite popular demands to respect the precautionary principle and despite calls to protect biodiversity made by scientists, academics, and civil and social organizations,1 during the six-year term that just ended, the federal executive branch – by means of SEMARNAT (Ministry of the Environment) and SAGARPA (Ministry of Agriculture) – gave permits for the first open-field GMO maize plantings, without taking into account that Mexico is the key center of origin for this basic food crop necessary to feed our country and the world. Adding up both the licenses for experimental-scale GMO maize crops (162) and the licenses for pilot-scale plantings, there are now 177 open field permits in Mexico. 
 During last year the federal government gave 15 such authorizations to Monsanto and other foreign companies to do pilot plantings [the phase that comes after experimental and before commercial plantings] of GMO maize within our national territory, with the grave risk that transgenes could contaminate our criole and native varieties of this grain, especially because there are no barriers to the wind and the insects that are responsable for cross pollenization. What is more, maize gets mixed during transportation and storage and at the end the whole harvest will be contaminated. 
 On September 7th of last year, the seed and agrochemical company Monsanto presented applications to the National Health, Food Safety and Quality Service (Senasica) for the first ever commercial cultivation GMO maize, specifically the MON89034-3, MON88017-3 and MON-00603-6 varieties, on 700 thousand hectares in 10 municipalities of the mexican state of Sinaloa. 
 In Tamaulipas, on September 20th the company Pioneer Hi-Bred International (with Du Pont) submitted applications for varieties DAS015507-2, DAS-01507-1, MON00603-6 and MON00603-7 on 351,284 hectares in 7 municipalities in that state. 
 The new commercial applications are being analyzed right now by Senasica, while all the technical information that was required for the earlier phases of permits was and continues to beemanaged as industrial or corporate secrets, without independent review, while keeping the location of the experimental plots secret from the public. Monsanto pressured and lobbied to obtain the new commercial permits before the change of government (the new president was innaugurated in December), but public pressure managed to hold this up. If the new government approves these applications, which they may do very soon, the first massive contamination of a center of origin of an important pillar of the global food system will occur. In effect we will all be witnesses to a crime against humanity.This comes at an ominous moment when Mexico is defined by its condition as a dependent country that imports 45 percent of its food, especially from the United States; with its agricultural infrastructure devastated and the countryside de-capitalized; with more than half of the total population livng in poverty, and with 28 million hungry people; all of this a result of free market agricultural policies that primarily benefit a tiny minority of large-scale producers and transnational companies to the detriment of everyone else. 
 Giving out permits for the commercial planting of GMO maize would be an attack on the constitutional right to food of the mexican people, making it ever more unlikely the majority of the mexican population could have access to healthy, high quality food, and it would essentially be the coup de grace to food sovereignty for the Mexican people.The key to increasing food production in the countryside, reducing poverty and ending hunger does not lie with GMOs. This is an extremely costly technology, which does not increase yields,2 causes more dependence on imported seeds and farm chemicals, and provides no advantage to confronting the challenges of climate change and its effects, like frosts and droughts. This is in addition to the fact that Mexico’s agro-food crisis is not of technological origen but rather is a product of an economic model, where hunger is not a result of scarcity but rather of lack of adequate income to access food. 
 In our country there are more than 60 native races and thousands of local varieties of maize, which instead of representing some kind of risk, carry important virtues thanks to their selection and adaptation by indigenous peoples over more than seven thousand years. Some of these native varieties offer higher yields than the ones manipulated by Monsanto. The imposition of transnational frankenseeds would mean an end to this richness and the loss of the ancestral milpa tradition as a sustainable system of maize production and symbol of the Mesoamerican cultural inheritance. 
 Maize is the main food product for the people of Mexico, from it comes 39 percent of the proteins and 53 percent of the calories necessary for human life. Maize consumption per inhabitant is among the highest in the world. Mexicans directly consume between 115 and 150 kilograms of maize per person every year. 
 The maize that comes from Sinaloa and Tamaulipas states is distributed in all the main cities for the production of tortillas, either as maize dough or maize flour. The Commission for Environmental Cooperation of North America, in their study on the effects of GMO maize in Mexico,3 recommended to the Mexican government that it investigate specifically the effects that such high levels of maize consumption on a daily basis could have on health issues related to GMOs. The Mexican population has the right to not run that risk. We do not want transgenic tortillas!We should not underestimate the risk for human health reflected in the recent study carried out at University of Caen, France, where researchers demonstrated that laboratory animals fed with Monsanto maize developed tumors several centimeters in size.4 This study represents the most overwhelming scientific proof of the dangers associated with genetically altered food. The GMO variety used in this experiment was precisely Monsanto’s MON 603, which they are now seeking to grow commercially in Mexico. 
 For all of these reasons, we demand that the Mexican government definitively ban all kinds of GMO maize crops in Mexico, and of course refuse to grant these permits for commercial planting of GMO maize,and we also demand that it revoke the experimental and pilot planting permits for GMO maize that have already been granted, and declare Mexico a country free of GMO maize. Monsanto’s interests and the interests of other transnationals are not the interests of the Nation. 
 We reject that the State sacrifice our consumer population (turning them into lab rats) and we peasants and small producers, to support transnational companies who produce GMO seeds and agro-chemicals. We, the farmers, and not the transnationals, feed the population. 
 We also demand the cancellation of permits for the commercial planting of GMO soy crops which are a threat to peasant agriculture and to beekeepers. 
 Our struggle is also to repeal the neoliberal Seeds Law and the Law on Biosecurity and Genetically Modified Organisms, which have opened the door to the GMO invasion. 
 We call upon organizations, activists, and cultural and public figures, and all concerned people, to join us in these demands, because only with the full participation of an organized society can we stop this outrage.NO TO GMO MAIZE IN MEXICO; MONSANTO OUT! 
 National Union of Autonomous Regional Peasant Organizations (UNORCA)<comisionejecutiva_unorca@hotmail.com> 
 On this day, we, the women of La Via Campesina – peasants, indigenous women, Afro-descendants,… Read more → 
